# Verses 105-112

## Exposition Verse 105

> Thy word *is* a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. 

"*Thy word is a lamp unto my feet*." We are walkers through the city of this world, and we are often called to go out into its darkness; let us never venture there without the light giving word, lest we slip with our feet. Each man should use the word of God personally, practically, and habitually, that he may see his way and see what lies in it. When darkness settles down upon all around me, the word of the Lord, like a flaming torch, reveals my way. Having no fixed lamps in eastern towns, in old time each passenger carried a lantern with him that he might not fall into the open sewer, or stumble over the heaps of ordure which defiled the road. This is a true picture of our path through this dark world: we should not know the way, or how to walk in it, if Scripture, like a blazing flambeau, did not reveal it. One of the most practical benefits of Holy Writ is guidance in the acts of daily life: it is not sent to astound us with its brilliance, but to guide us by its instruction. It is true the head needs illumination, but even more the feet need direction, else head and feet may both fall into a ditch. Happy is the man who personally appropriates God's word, and practically uses it as his comfort and counsellor,---a lamp to his own feet.

"*And a light unto my path*." It is a lamp by night, a light by day, and a delight at all times. David guided his own steps by it, and also saw the difficulties of his road by its beams. He who walks in darkness is sure, sooner or later, to stumble; while he who walks by the light of day, or by the lamp of night, stumbleth not, but keeps his uprightness. Ignorance is painful upon practical subjects; it breeds indecision and suspense, and these are uncomfortable: the word of God, by imparting heavenly knowledge, leads to decision, and when that is followed by determined resolution, as in this case, it brings with it great restfulness of heart.

This verse converses with God in adoring and yet familiar tones. Have we not something of like tenor to address to our heavenly Father?

Note how like this verse is to the first verse of the first octave, and the first of the second and other octaves. The seconds also are often in unison.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 105 &mdash;** "*Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light* ," etc. David was a man of very good wit and natural understanding; but he gives to God the glory of his wisdom, and owns that his best light was but darkness when he was not lightened and ruled by the word of God. Oh that we would consider this, that in all our ways wherein the word of God shines not unto us to direct us, we do but walk in darkness, and our ways without it can lead us to none other end but utter darkness. If we hearken not to the word of God, if we walk not by the rule thereof, how is it possible we can come to the face of God? *William Cowper*.

**Verse 105 &mdash;** "*Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path*." The use of a lamp is by night, while the light of the sun shineth by day. Whether it be day or night with us, we clearly understand our duty by the Word of God. The *night* signifieth adversity, and the *day* prosperity. Hence we may learn how to behave ourselves in all conditions. The word "*path* " notes our general choice and course of life; the word "*feet* " our particular actions. Now whether the matter, wherein we would be informed, concerneth our choice of the way that leadeth to true happiness, or our dexterous prosecution of the way, still the word of God will direct a humble and well disposed mind. *Thomas Manton*.

**Verse 105 &mdash;** "*Thy word is a lamp unto my feet* ," etc. Basil the Great, interpreting the "*word* " as God's will revealed in Holy Scripture, observes that the Old Testament, and in especial the Law, was only a *lantern* (*lamp* or *candle*) because an artificial light, imperfectly illumining the darkness, whereas the Gospel, given by the Lord Jesus himself, is a *light* of the Sun of Righteousness, giving brightness to all things. Ambrose, going yet deeper, tells us that Christ is himself both *lamp* and *light*. He, the Word of God, is a great light to some, to others he is a lamp. To me he is a lamp; to angels a light. He was a light to Peter, when the angel stood by him in the prison, and the light shined about him. He was a light to Paul when the light from heaven shined round about him, and he heard Christ saying to him, "*Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me*?" And Christ is truly a lamp to me when I speak of him with my mouth. He shineth in clay, he shineth in a potter's vessel: he is that treasure which we bear in earthen vessels. *Neale and Littledale*.

**Verse 105 &mdash;** "*Thy word is a lamp...and a light*." Except the "*lamp* " be lighted---except the teaching of the Spirit accompany the word---all is "darkness, gross darkness" still. Did we more habitually malt to receive, and watch to improve, the light of the word, we should not so often complain of the perplexity of our path. *Charles Bridges*.

**Verse 105 &mdash;** "*Thy word is a lamp unto my feet* ," etc. What we all want, is not to see wonders that daze us, and to be rapt in ecstatic visions and splendours, but a little light on the dark and troubled path we have to tread, a lamp that will burn steadfastly and helpfully over the work we have to do. The stars are infinitely more sublime, meteors infinitely more superb and dazzling; but the lamp shining in a dark place is infinitely closer to our practical needs. *From* "*The Expositor* ," 1864.

**Verse 105 &mdash;** "*Thy word is a lamp unto my feet*." Going two miles into a neighbourhood where very few could read, to spend an evening in reading to a company who were assembled to listen, and about to return by a narrow path through the woods, where paths diverged, I was provided with a torch of light wood, or "pitch pine." I objected; it was too small, weighing not over half a pound. "*It will light you home* ," answered my host. I said, "The wind may blow it out." He said, "It will light you home." "But if it should rain?" I again objected. "It will light you home," he insisted. Contrary to my fears, it gave abundant light to my path all the way home, furnishing an apt illustration, I often think, of the way in which doubting hearts would be led safely along the "narrow way." If they would take the Bible as their guide, it would be a lamp to their feet, leading to the heavenly home. One man had five objections to the Bible. If he would take it as a lamp to his feet, it would "light him home." Another told me he had two faults to find with the Bible. I answered him in the words of my good friend who furnished the torch, "It will light you home." *From* "*The American Messenger* ," 1881.

**Verse 105 &mdash;** "*A lamp unto my feet* ," etc. All depends on our way of using the lamp. A man tells that when a boy he was proud to carry the lantern for his Sabbath school teacher. The way to their school led through unlit, muddy streets. The boy held the lantern far too high, and both sank in the deep mud. "Ah! you must hold the lamp lower," the teacher exclaimed, as they gained a firm footing on the farther side of the slough. The teacher then beautifully explained our text, and the man declares that he never forgot the lesson of that night. You may easily hold the lamp too high; but you can hardly hold it too low. *James Wells* , *in* "*Bible Images* ," 1882.

**Verse 105 &mdash;** "*Light*." Lead, kindly light, amid the encircling gloom Lead thou me on. The night is dark, and I am far from home, Lead thou me on. Keep thou my feet; I do not ask to see The distant scene; one step enough for me. *John Henry Newman* (1801-1890).

**Verses 105-106 &mdash;** "*A light unto my path. I have sworn, and I will perform it* ," etc. I have looked upon thy word as a lamp to my own feet, as a thing nearly concerning myself, and then I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. It is a mighty means to stir up a man's spirit, and quicken him to obedience, to look upon the word as written to himself, as a lamp and a light for him. When you come to hear out of God's Word, and God directs the minister so that you apprehend the truth as spoken to you, it will stir and awaken you, and you will say, "Oh me thought this day every word the minister spoke was directed to me; I must take heed thereto." And so every word in the Scripture that concerns thee God writes to thee; and if thou wilt take it so, it will be a mighty means to stir thee up to obedience. *Jeremiah Burroughs* , 1599-1646.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verses 105-112 &mdash;** "*The word a lamp*." For guidance (Psa 119:105-106). For life in affliction (Psa 119:107). For preservation in peril of enemies (Psa 119:109-110). For joy of heart (Psa 119:111-112). *Outlines Upon Keywords of the Psalm* , *by Pastor C. A. Davis*.

**Verses 105-108 &mdash;** 1. Illumination (Psa 119:105). 2. Decision (Psa 119:106). 3. Testing: "*I am afflicted* " (Psa 119:107). 4. Consecration (Psa 119:108). 5. Education: "*teach me* ," etc. (Psa 119:108).

**Verse 105 &mdash;** The practical, personal, everyday use of the word of God. **Verse 105 &mdash;** Lamp light. 1. The believer's dangerous night journey through the world. 2. The lamp that illumines his path. 3. The eternal day towards which he travels (when the lamp will be laid aside: Rev 22:5). *C. A. D.*

## Exposition Verse 106

> I have sworn, and I will perform *it*, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. 

"*I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments*." Under the influence of the clear light of knowledge he had firmly made up his mind, and solemnly declared his resolve in the sight of God. Perhaps mistrusting his own fickle mind, he had pledged himself in sacred form to abide faithful to the determinations and decisions of his God. Whatever path might open before him, he was sworn to follow that only upon which the lamp of the word was shining. The Scriptures are God's judgments, or verdicts, upon great moral questions; these are all righteous, and hence righteous men should be resolved to keep them at all hazards, since it must always be right to do right. Experience shows that the less of covenanting and swearing men formally enter upon the better, and the genius of our Saviour's teaching is against all supererogatory pledging and swearing; and yet under the gospel we ought to feel ourselves as much bound to obey the word of the Lord as if we had taken an oath so to do. The bonds of love are not less sacred than the fetters of law. When a man has vowed he must be careful to "perform it," and when a man has not vowed in so many words to keep the Lord's judgments, yet is he equally bound to do so by obligations which exist apart from any promise on our part,---obligations founded in the eternal fitness of things, and confirmed by the abounding goodness of the Lord our God. Will not every believer own that he is under bonds to the redeeming Lord to follow his example, and keep his words? Yes, the vows of the Lord are upon us, especially upon such as have made profession of discipleship, have been baptized into the thrice holy name, have eaten of the consecrated memorials, and have spoken in the name of the Lord Jesus: We are enlisted, and sworn in, and are bound to be loyal soldiers all through the war. Thus having taken the word into our hearts by a firm resolve to obey it, we have a lamp within our souls as well as in the Book, and our course will be light unto the end.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 106 &mdash;** "*I have sworn* ," etc. Patrick's paraphrase is, "I have solemnly resolved and bound myself by the most sacred ties, which I will never break, but do now confirm."

**Verse 106 &mdash;** "*I have sworn*." I would now urge you to make a solemn surrender of yourself unto the service of God. Do not only form such a purpose in your heart, but expressly declare it in the Divine presence. Such solemnity in the manner of doing it is certainly very reasonable in the nature of things; and sure it is highly expedient, for binding to the Lord such a treacherous heart, as we know our own to be. It will be pleasant to reflect upon it as done at such and such a time, with such and such circumstances of place and method, which may serve to strike the memory and the conscience. The sense of the vows of God which are upon you will strengthen you in an hour of temptation; and the recollection may encourage your humble boldness and freedom in applying to him under the character and relation of your covenant God and Father, as future exigencies may require. Do it therefore, but do it deliberately. Consider what it is that you are to do: and consider how reasonable it is that it should be done, and done cordially and cheerfully, "not by constraint, but willingly;" for in this sense, and every other, "God loveth a cheerful giver."... Let me remind you that this surrender must be perpetual. You must give yourself up to God in such a manner, as never more to pretend to be your own; for the rights of God are like his nature, eternal and immutable; and with regard to his rational creatures, are the same yesterday, today, and for ever. I would further advise and urge, that this dedication may be made with all possible solemnity. Do it in express words. And perhaps it may be in many cases most expedient, as many pious divines have recommended, to do it in writing. Set your hand and seal to it, "that on such a day of such a month and year, and at such a place, on full consideration and serious reflection, you came to this happy resolution, that whatever others might do, you would serve the Lord." *Philip Doddridge* (1702-1751) *in* "*The Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul* "

**Verse 106 &mdash;** Frequently renew settled and holy resolutions. A soldier un-resolved to fight may easily be defeated. True and sharpened courage treads down those difficulties which would triumph over a cold and wavering spirit. Resolution in a weak man will perform more than strength in a coward. The weakness of our graces, the strength of our temptations, and the diligence of our spiritual enemies, require strong resolutions. We must be "*steadfast and unmoveable* ," and this will make us "*abound in the work of the Lord* :" 1Co 15:58. Abundant exercise in God's work will strengthen the habit of grace, increase our skill in the contest, and make the victory more easy and pleasant to us. Let us frame believing, humble resolutions in the strength of God's grace, with a fear of ourselves, but a confidence in God. David bound himself to God with a hearty vow, depending upon his strength: "*I have sworn, and i will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments*." This was not in his own strength, for, Psa 119:107, he desires God to quicken him, and to "*accept the freewill offerings of his mouth* ," Psa 119:108, namely, the oath which proceeded from a free and resolved will. God will not slight, but strengthen the affectionate resolutions of his creature. We cannot keep ourselves from falling unless we first keep our resolutions from flagging. *Stephen Charnock*.

**Verse 106 &mdash;** "*I have sworn, and I will perform it*." Theodoricus, Archbishop of Cologne, when the Emperor Sigismund demanded of him the most direct and most compendious way how to attain true happiness, made answer in brief, thus: "Perform when thou art well what thou promisedst when thou wast sick." David did so; he made vows in war, and paid them in peace; and thus should all good men do; not like the cunning devil, of whom the epigrammatist writeth: The devil was sick, the devil a monk would be; The devil was well, the devil a monk was he. Nor like unto many now a days, that, if God's hand do but lie somewhat heavy upon them, oh, what promises, what engagements are there for amendment of life! How like unto marble against rain do they seem to sweat and melt but still retain their hardness! Let but the rod be taken off their backs, or health restored, then, as their bodies live, their vows die; all is forgotten: nay, many times it so falleth out, that they are far worse than ever they were before. *From John Spencer's "Things New and Old* ," 1658.

**Verse 106 &mdash;** "*Thy righteous judgments*." So David styles the word of God, because it judgeth most righteously between right and wrong, truth and falsehood. And, secondly, because according to the judgment given therein, God will act towards men. Let us take heed unto it; for the word contains God's judgment of men and hath a catalogue of such as shall not inherit the kingdom of God, and another of such as shall dwell in God's tabernacle; let us read and see in which of the two catalogues our two selves are; for according to that word will the judgment go. *William Cowper*.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 106 &mdash;** Decision for God, and fit modes of expressing it.

**Verse 106 &mdash;** 1. Veneration for the word. 2. Consecration to the word. 3. Fidelity to the word. *G. R.*

**Verse 106 &mdash;** Swearing and performing. 1. The usefulness of religious vows. To quicken perception; to rouse conscience; (seen in Jewish nation: Exo 34:27-28; 2Ch 15:12-15; Neh 10:28-29; in Scottish nation---Solemn League and Covenant). 2. The danger of religious vows. A vow unfulfilled, or receded from, is a moral injury: Ecc 5:4-7. 3. The safeguard of religious vows: dependence on the Spirit of God: Eze 11:19-20; 2Co 4:5. *C. A. D.*

## Exposition Verse 107

> I am afflicted very much: quicken me, O LORD, according unto thy word. 

"*I am afflicted very much*." According to the last verse he had been sworn in as a soldier of the Lord, and in this next verse he is called to suffer hardness in that capacity. Our service of the Lord does not screen us from trial, but rather secures it for us. The Psalmist was a consecrated man, and yet a chastened man; nor were his chastisements light; for it seemed as if the more he was obedient the more he was afflicted. He evidently felt the rod to be cutting deep, and this he pleads before the Lord. He speaks not by way of murmuring, but by way of pleading; from the very much affliction he argues for very much quickening.

"*Quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy word*." This is the best remedy for tribulation; the soul is raised above the thought of present distress, and is filled with that holy joy which attends all vigorous spiritual life, and so the affliction grows light. Jehovah alone can quicken: he has life in himself, and therefore can communicate it readily; he can give us life at any moment, yea, at this present instant; for it is of the nature of quickening to be quick in its operation. The Lord has promised, prepared, and provided this blessing of renewed life for all his waiting servants: it is a covenant blessing, and it is as obtainable as it is needful. Frequently the affliction is made the means of the quickening, even as the stirring of a fire promotes the heat of the flame. In their affliction some desire death, let us pray for life. Our forebodings under trial are often very gloomy, let us entreat the Lord to deal with us, not according to our fears, but according to his own word. David had but few promises to quote, and probably these were in his own psalms, yet he pleads the word of the Lord; how much more should we do so, since to us so many holy men have spoken by the Spirit of the Lord in that wonderful library which is now our Bible. Seeing we have more promises, let us offer more prayers.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 107 &mdash;** "*I am afflicted very much* ," etc. Whence learn, 1. It is no strange thing for the most holy men to be acquainted with the saddest sort of affliction, bodily and spiritual: "*I am afflicted very much*." 2. From whence soever affliction doth come, faith goeth to God only for comfort, as here: "*Quicken me, O Lord*." 3. When God is pleased to make the word of promise lively, or to perform what the promise alloweth us to expect, such a consolation is a sufficient antidote to the heaviest affliction: "*Quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy word*." *David Dickson*.

**Verse 107 &mdash;** "*I am a afflicted very much*." We can recommend so persuasively the cheerful drinking of the cup of sorrow when in the hand of others, but what wry faces we make when it is put into our own. *Alfred John Morris* , 1814-1869.

**Verse 107 &mdash;** "*I am afflicted... quicken me*." The Christian lives in the midst of crosses, as the fish lives in the sea. *Jean Baptiste Marie Vianney* , 1786-1859.

**Verse 107 &mdash;** "*Quicken me, O Lord*." How doth God quicken us? By reviving our suffering graces, such as our hope, patience, and faith. Thus he puts life into us again, that we may go on cheerfully in our service, by infusion of new comforts. He revives the heart of his contrite ones, so the prophet saith (Isa 57:15). This is very necessary, for the Psalmist saith elsewhere, "*Quicken us, and we will call upon thy name* " (Psa 80:18). Discomfort and discouragement weaken our hands in calling upon God. Until the Lord cheers us again we have no life in prayer. By two things especially doth God quicken us in affliction, by reviving our sense of his love, and by reviving our hope of glory. *Thomas Manton*.

**Verse 107 &mdash;** "*According unto thy word*." David goes often over with that phrase, which imports that David lay under the sense of some promise which God had made for the quickening of his heart when it was out of frame, and accordingly he recounts the gracious influences of God's Spirit, and professes that he will never forget his precepts, because by them he had quickened him: Psa 119:93. Thus, lay your dead hearts at Christ's feet, and plead in this manner: Lord, my heart is exceedingly dull and distracted; I feel not those enlarging, melting influences which thy saints have felt; but are they not chief material mercies of the covenant? dost thou not promise a spirit of illumination, conviction, and humiliation? is not holiness of heart and life a main branch of it? dost thou not promise therein to write thy law in my heart? to give me oneness of heart, to put thy fear within me, to subdue my corruptions, to help my infirmities in prayer? Now, Lord, these are the mercies my soul wants and waits for, fill my soul with these animating influences, revive thy work of grace in my soul, draw out my heart towards thee, increase my affection for thee, repair thine image, call forth grace into lively exercise. Doth not that gracious word intend such a mercy when thou sayest thou wilt not only give a new heart, but "*put a new spirit within me* " (Eze 36:26), to make my soul lively, active, and spiritual in duties and exercises? Dear Lord, am not I in covenant with thee? and are not these covenant mercies? why, then, my God, is my heart thus hardened from thy fear? why dost thou leave me in all this deadness and distraction? Remember thy word unto thy servant in which thou hast caused me to hope, and which thou hast helped me to plead; O quicken my dull heart according to thy word. *Oliver Heywood*.

**Verse 107 &mdash;** "*According unto thy word*." David, when he begs for quickening, he is encouraged so to do by a promise. The question is, where this promise should be? Some think it was that general promise of the law, if thou do these things, thou shalt live in them (Lev 18:5), and that from thence David drew this particular conclusion, that God would give life to his people. But rather, it was some other promise, some word of God he had, to bear him out in this request. The Lord has made many promises to us of sanctifying our affliction. The fruit of all shall be the taking away of sin (Isa 27:9); of bettering and improving us by it (Heb 4:10), of moderating our affliction, that he will stay his rough wind in the day of the east wind (Isa 27:8); that he will lay no more upon us than he will enable us to bear (1Co 10:13). He hath promised he will moderate our affliction, so that we shall not be tempted above our strength. He hath promised he will deliver us from it, that the rod of the wicked shall not always rest on the lot of the righteous (Psa 125:3); that he will be with us in it, and never fail us (Heb 13:5). Now, I argue thus: if the people of God could stay their hearts upon God's word, when they had but such obscure hints to work upon that we do not know where the promise lies, ah! how should our hearts be stayed upon God, when we have so many promises! When the Scriptures are enlarged for the comfort and enlarging of our faith, surely we should say now as Paul, when he got a word, "*I believed God* " (Act 27:25); I may expect God will do thus for me, when his word speaks it everywhere. *Thomas Manton*.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 107 &mdash;** 1. A good man greatly afflicted. 2. A sure cure for the ills of affliction: "*Quicken me*." 3. A safe rule to pray by when afflicted: "*according unto thy word*."

**Verse 107 &mdash;** 1. The "*very much* " afflicted. a. The world has such---widows, orphans, etc., etc. b. Most take their turn. 2. But there is "*very much* " grace. a. God's word promises the needed quickening. b. Himself very much greater than all our needs. c. Christ died "*in all points* " has all help. 3. Therefore bring "*very much* " faith, as the Psalmist here. a. Keen eyed for promises. b. Fervent in pleading them. c. Strong in expectation. *W. B. H.*

## Exposition Verse 108

> Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O LORD, and teach me thy judgments. 

"*Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O Lord*." The living praise the living God, and therefore the quickened one presents his sacrifice. He offers prayer, praise, confession, and testimony---these, presented with his voice in the presence of an audience, were the tribute of his mouth unto Jehovah. He trembles lest these should be so ill uttered as to displease the Lord, and therefore he implores acceptance. He pleads that the homage of his mouth was cheerfully and spontaneously rendered; all his utterances were freewill offerings. There can be no value in extorted confessions: God's revenues are not derived from forced taxation, but from freewill donation. There can be no acceptance where there is no willingness; there is no work of free grace where there is no fruit of free will. Acceptance is a favour to be sought from the Lord with all earnestness, for without it our offerings are worse than useless. What a wonder of grace that the Lord will accept anything of such unworthy ones as we are!

"*And teach me thy judgments*." When we render unto the Lord our best, we become all the more concerned to do better. If, indeed, the Lord shall accept us, we then desire to be further instructed, that we may be still more acceptable. After quickening we need teaching: life without light, or zeal without knowledge, would be but half a blessing. These repeated cries for teaching show the humility of the man of God, and also discover to us our own need of similar instruction. Our judgment needs educating till it knows, agrees with, and acts upon, the judgments of the Lord. Those judgments are not always so clear as to be seen at once; we need to be taught in them till we admire their wisdom and adore their goodness as soon as ever we perceive them.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 108 &mdash;** "*The freewill offerings of the mouth* ," may be the offerings which the mouth had promised and vowed. And who can lay claim to these as the Lord? His are all things. *John Stephen*.

**Verse 108 &mdash;** "*The freewill offerings of my mouth*." This place makes known that species of sacrifices, which neither tribulations nor poverty of means can hinder, and which does not require an external temple, but in desert places and among heathen may be offered by a godly man. And these sacrifices of the mouth God himself makes more of than if all the flocks of the whole earth had been offered to him, and all the treasures of gold, and of silver, and of precious stones. *Wolfgang Musculus*.

**Verse 108 &mdash;** "*Freewill offerings*." This expression is often used in the law (Lev 22:18; Num 29:39; 2Ch 31:14; Amo 4:5). What are these freewill offerings? They are distinguished from God's stated worship, and distinguished from that service which fell under a vow. Besides the stated peace offerings, there were certain sacrifices performed upon certain occasions, to testify God's general goodness, and upon receipt of some special mercy; and you will find these sacrifices to be expressly distinguished from such services as men bound themselves to by vow (Lev 7:16)... These serve to teach us two things. First. They are to teach us how ready we should be to take all occasions of thankfulness and spiritual worship; for, besides their vowed services and instituted sacrifices, they had their freewill offerings, offered to God in thankfulness for some special blessing received, or for deliverance from danger. Secondly. It shows with what voluntariness and cheerfulness we should go about God's worship in the Gospel, and what a free disposition of heart there should be, and edge upon our affections, in all things that we offer to God; in this latter sense our offerings to God---prayer and praise---should be freewill offerings, come from us not like water out of a still forced by the fire, but like water out of a fountain with native freeness, readily and freely. *Thomas Manton*.

**Verse 108 &mdash;** "*Offerings*." All God's people are made priests unto God; for every offering supposes a priest: so it is said, that Christ Jesus hath made us kings and priests (Rev 1:6). All Christians have a communion with Christ in all his offices, whatever Christ was, that certainly they are in some measure and degree. *Thomas Manton*.

**Verse 108 &mdash;** "*Accept...the freewill offerings of my mouth, O Lord*." It is a great grace that the Lord should accept anything from us, if we consider these three things: First, who the Lord is; next, what we are; thirdly, what it is we have to give unto him. As for the Lord, he is all sufficient, and stands in need of nothing we can give him. Our goodness extends not to the Lord (Psa 16). As for us, we are poor creatures, living by his liberality; yea, begging from all the rest of his creatures; from the sun and moon; from the air, the water, and the earth; from fowls and fishes; yea, from the worms: some give us light, some meat, some clothes; and are such beggars as we meet to give to a king? And, thirdly, if we well consider, What is it that we give? Have we anything to give but that which we have received from him? and whereof we may say with David, "*O Lord, all things are of thee, and of thine own have we given thee again* " (1Ch 29:14). Let this humble us, and restrain us from that vain conceit of meriting at God's hand. David at this time, in his great necessity, having no other sacrifice to offer unto the Lord, offers him the calves of his lips; but no doubt, when he might, he offered more. There is nothing so small, but if it come from a good heart, God will accept it: the widow's mite, a cup of cold water; yea, and the praise of our lips, although it has no other external oblation joined with it: but where men may do more, and will not, it is an argument that their heart is not sincerely affected toward him, and their praises are not welcome to him. *William Cowper*.

**Verse 108 &mdash;** "*Accept...the freewill offerings of my mouth, O Lord, and teach me thy judgments*." Two things we are here taught to pray for in reference to our religious performances. 1. Acceptance of them: this we must aim at in all we do in religion, that whether present or absent we may be accepted of the Lord. That which David here earnestly prays for the acceptance of is "*the freewill offerings* ," not of his purse, but of his "*mouth* ," his prayers and praises; "*the calves of our lips* " (Hos 14:2); "*the fruit of our lips* " (Heb 13:15); these are the spiritual offerings which all Christians, as spiritual priests, must offer to God; and they must be "*freewill offerings* ;" for we must offer them abundantly and cheerfully; and it is this willing mind that is accepted. The more there is of freeness and willingness in the service of God, the more pleasing it is to him. 2. Assistance in them: "*Teach me thy judgments*." We cannot offer any thing to God which we have reason to think he will accept of, but what he is pleased to instruct us in the doing of; and we must be as earnest for the grace of God in us as for the favour of God toward us. *Matthew Henry*.

**Verse 108 &mdash;** "*Teach me thy judgments*." As if the man of God should say, This is one thing whereunto I will give over myself, even to see how thou dost punish the wicked, and conduct thy children. So that we must learn, that as it is necessary to understand the law and the gospel, so is it requisite to discern God's judgments. For as we cannot learn the one without observing God's mercy; so we cannot attain to the other without marking his vengeance. We must see always by the peculiar teaching of God's Spirit, how the Lord punishes in justice, and yet in mercy; in wrath, and yet in love; in rigour and hatred of our sin, humbling us with one hand; in pity and compassion to our salvation, comforting us with the other hand. We see then how the prophet prayeth, both to see them and to mark them: we need teach this often, because we dream so much of fatal necessity, and of the connections of natural causes, or else because we call not discern between the crosses of the godly and the ungodly...This is then a singular gift of God, to discern how by the self same means the Lord both humbleth the good and overthroweth the wicked. *Richard Greenham*.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 108 &mdash;** Consider, 1. The instructive title given to prayer and praise: "*The free will offerings of my mouth*." a. It shows the believer to be a priest: "*offerings*." b. It shows the peculiarity of his service: "*free will*." c. It implies wholehearted consecration. 2. The humility portrayed in the prayer: "*Accept, I beseech thee*." a. Here is no pharisaic boasting. b. Even the free will offering is felt to need an "*I beseech thee*." 3. The longing desire for further instruction in order to a more perfect obedience: "*Teach me thy judgments*." *J. P.*

**Verse 108 &mdash;** Free will seeking free grace. *W. D.*

**Verse 108 &mdash;** Work for Free-willers. 1. Offerings of Prayer---for each of the blessings of salvation. 2. Offerings of Repudiation---of all claim to unassisted good. 3. Offerings of Praise---for sovereign grace. *W. B. H.*

## Exposition Verse 109

> My soul *is* continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law. 

"*My soul is continually in my hand*." He lived in the midst of danger. He had to be always fighting for existence---hiding in caves, or contending in battles. This is a very uncomfortable and trying state of affairs, and men are apt to think any expedient justifiable by which they can end such a condition: but David did not turn aside to find safety in sin, for he says, "*Yet do I not forget thy law*." They say that all things are fair in love and war; but the holy man thought not so: while he carried his life in his hand, he also carried the law in his heart. No danger of body should make us endanger our souls by forgetting that which is right. Trouble makes many a man forget his duty, and it would have had the same effect upon the Psalmist if he had not obtained quickening (Psa 119:107) and teaching (Psa 119:108). In his memory of the Lord's law lay his safety; he was certain not to be forgotten of God, for God was not forgotten of him. It is a special proof of grace when nothing can drive truth out of our thoughts, or holiness out of our lives. If we remember the law even when death stares us in the face, we may be well assured that the Lord is remembering us.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 109 &mdash;** "*My soul is continually in my hand*." He had his soul in his hand, ready to give whenever God should take it. And this is to be observed, that there is no trouble so ready to take away the life of God's children, as they are ready to give it. As Elijah came out to the mouth of his cave to meet with the Lord; and Abraham in the door of his tent to speak to the angel; so the soul of the godly stands ready in the door of the tabernacle of this body to remove when the Lord shall command it; whereas the soul of the wicked lies back, hiding itself, as Adam among the bushes, and is taken out of the body perforce; as was the soul of that worldling; "*This night thy soul shall be required of thee* ;" but they never sacrifice their souls willingly to the Lord. *William Cowper*.

**Verse 109 &mdash;** "*My soul is continually in my hand*." If any one carry in the hand a fragile vessel, made of glass or any other similar material, filled with a precious liquor, especially if the hand be weak, or if from other causes dangers be threatening, he will scarcely be able to avoid the breaking of the vessel and the running out of the liquor. Such is the condition of my life, which I, set upon by various enemies, carry as it were in my hand; which, therefore, is exposed to such great danger, as that I always have death present before my sight, my life hanging on the slenderest thread. *Andreas Rivetus* , 1572-1651.

**Verse 109 &mdash;** "*My soul is continually in my hand*." The believer is always in the very jaws of death. He lives with wings outstretched to fly away. Paul testified, "*I die daily*." In the extremity of persecution, the fervent desire was to know what God would have him to do. *Henry Law*.

**Verse 109 &mdash;** "*My soul is continually in my hand*." I make no more of life than a child doth of his bird which he carrieth in the palm of his hand held open. *John Trapp*.

**Verse 109 &mdash;** "*My soul is continually in my hand* ," etc. Why doth David say, "*My soul is in mine hand* ;" had he called it out of the hand of God, and taken the care of it upon himself? Nothing less. His meaning is only this, ---I walk in the midst of dangers and among a thousand deaths continually; I am in deaths often, my life is exposed to perils every day, yet do I not forget thy law: I keep close to thee, and will keep close to thee whatsoever comes of it. Augustine upon that place doth ingeniously confess that he understood not what David meant, by having his soul in his hands; but Jerome, another of the ancients, teacheth us, that it is an Hebraism, signifying a state of most extreme peril. The Greeks also have drawn it into a proverb speaking the same thing. But why doth the holding or putting the life in the hand signify the exposing of the life to peril? There is a twofold reason of it. First. Because those things which are carried openly in the hand are apt to fall out of the hand, and being carried in sight, they are apt to be snatched or wrested out of the hand. And, therefore, though to be in the hand of God signifies *safety* , because his hand is armed with irresistible power to protect us; yet for a man to carry a thing in his own hand is to carry it in danger, because his hand is weak, and there are safer ways of carrying or conveying a thing than openly in the hand. If a man be to ride a long journey with any treasure about him, he doth not carry it in his hand, but puts it in some secret and close place where it may be hidden, and so be more secure. The Chaldee paraphrast, to express the elegancy of that place forecited out of the Psalm, gives it thus, "*My life is in as much danger as if it stood upon the very superficies or outside of my hand* ," as if he had no hold of it, but it stood barely upon his hand; for that which is set upon the palm of the hand, and not grasped, is in greater danger. Things safe kept are hidden or held fast. Secondly. There is another reason of that speech, because when a man is about to deliver a thing or to give it up, he takes it in his hand. They that put themselves upon great perils and dangers for God and his people, deliver up their lives and their all to God. Hence that counsel of the Apostle (1Pe 4:19): "*Let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator*." So here, the life of men in danger is said to be put in the hand, because such are, as it were, ready to deliver and commit their lives unto God, that he would take care of their lives to preserve them from the danger, or to take them to himself if they lose them in his service. *Joseph Caryl*.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 109 &mdash;** The soul's life in jeopardy. The life of the soul secured.

**Verses 109-110 &mdash;** Here is, 1. David in danger of losing his life. There is but a step between him and death; for "*the wicked have laid a snare* " for him. Wherever he was he found some design or other laid against him; which made him say, "*My soul is continually in my hand*." It was not so only as a man---it is true of us all that we are exposed to the strokes of death---but as a man of war, and especially as "*a man after God's own heart*." 2. David in no danger of losing his religion through this peril; for, a. He "*doth not forget the law* ," and therefore is likely to persevere. b. He hath not yet erred from God's precepts, and therefore it is to be hoped he will not. *M. Henry*.

## Exposition Verse 110

> The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy precepts. 

"*The wicked have laid a snare for me*." Spiritual life is the scene of constant danger: the believer lives with his life in his hand, and meanwhile all seem plotting to take it from him, by cunning if they cannot by violence. We shall not find it an easy thing to live the life of the faithful. Wicked spirits and wicked men will leave no stone unturned for our destruction. If all other devices fail, and even hidden pits do not succeed, the wicked still persevere in their treacherous endeavours, and, becoming craftier still, they set snares for the victim of their hate. The smaller species of game are usually taken by this method, by gin, or trap, or net, or noose. Wicked men are quite indifferent as to the manner in which they can destroy the good man---they think no more of him than if he were a rabbit or a rat: cunning and treachery are always the allies of malice, and everything like a generous or chivalrous feeling is unknown among the graceless, who treat the godly as if they were vermin to be exterminated. When a man knows that he is thus assailed, he is too apt to become timorous, and rush upon some hasty device for deliverance, not without sin in the endeavour; but David calmly kept his way, and was able to write, "*Yet I erred not from thy precepts*." He was not snared, for he kept his eyes open, and kept near his God. He was not entrapped and robbed, for he followed the King's highway of holiness, where God secures safety to every traveller. He did not err from the right, and he was not deterred from following it, because he referred to the Lord for guidance, and obtained it. If we err from the precepts, we part with the promises; if we get away from God's presence, we wander into the wilds where the fowlers freely spread their nets. From this verse let us learn to be on our guard, for we, too, have enemies both crafty and wicked. Hunters set their traps in the animals usual runs, and our worst snares are laid in our own ways. By keeping to the ways of the Lord we shall escape the snares of our adversaries, for his ways are safe and free from treachery.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 110 &mdash;** "*The wicked*." He calls them wicked men; which imports three things. First, they work wickedness. Secondly, they love it. Thirdly, they persevere in it. *William Cowper*.

**Verse 110 &mdash;** "*A snare*." One manner of catching wild animals, such as lions, bears, jackals, foxes, hart, roebuck, and fallow deer, was by a trap (*paeh*), which is the word used in this place; this was set under ground (Job 18:10), in the run of the animal (Pro 22:5), and caught it by the leg (Job 18:9). *William Latham Bevan* , in *Smith's Dictionary of the Bible* , 1863.

**Verse 110 &mdash;** "*The wicked have laid a snare for me*." In eating, he sets before us gluttony; in love he impels to lust; in labour, sluggishness; in conversing, envy; in governing, covetousness; in correcting, anger; in honour, pride; in the heart, he sets evil thoughts; in the mouth evil words; in actions, evil works; when awake, he moves us to evil actions; when asleep, to filthy dreams. *Girolamo Savonarola* , 1452-1498.

**Verse 110 &mdash;** "*Laid a snare for me: yet I erred not* ," etc. It is not the laying the bait hurts the fish, if the fish do not bite. *Thomas Watson*.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 110 &mdash;** Various kinds of snares, and the one way of escaping them.

**Verse 110 &mdash;** Consider, 1. Some of the snares set for saints by sinners. a. Doctrinal snares, by intellectual sinners. b. False accusations, by malignant sinners. c. False flatteries, by deceitful sinners. d. False charity, by a large number of sinners nowadays. 2. The secure safeguard for a saint's safety: "*I erred not from thy precepts*." Obedience to God gives security, because--- a. The snares are then suspected and watched against. b. The feet cannot become entangled by them. c. God keeps him who keeps his word. *J. F.*

## Exposition Verse 111

> Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they *are* the rejoicing of my heart. 

"*Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever*." He chose them as his lot, his portion, his estate; and what is more, he laid hold upon them and made them so,---taking them into possession and enjoyment. David's choice is our choice. If we might have our desire, we would desire to keep the commands of God perfectly. To know the doctrine, to enjoy the promise, to practise the command,---be this a kingdom large enough for me. Here we have an inheritance which cannot fade and cannot be alienated; it is for ever, and ours for ever, if we have so taken it. Sometimes, like Israel at the first coming into Canaan, we have to take our heritage by hard fighting, and, if so, it is worthy of all our labour and suffering; but always it has to be taken by a decided choice of the heart and grip of the will. What God gives we must take. "*For they are the rejoicing of my heart*." The gladness which had come to him through the word of the Lord had caused him to make an unalterable choice of it. All the parts of Scripture had been pleasing to David, and were so still and therefore he stuck to them, and meant to stick to them for ever. That which rejoices the heart is sure to be chosen and treasured. It is not the head knowledge but the heart experience which brings the joy.

In this verse, which is the seventh of its octave, we have reached the same sweetness as in the last seventh (Psa 119:103): indeed, in several of the adjoining sevenths, delight is evident. How good a thing it is when experience ripens into joy, passing up through sorrow, prayer, conflict, hope, decision, and holy content into rejoicing! Joy fixes the spirit: when once a man's heart rejoices in the divine word, he greatly values it, and is for ever united to it.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 111 &mdash;** "*Thy testimonies have I taken* ," etc. The Scripture is called "*testimonies* " in respect to God himself, because it doth give a testimony to him, and makes God known to us: it gives a testimony of all those attributes that are himself, of his wisdom, of his power, of his justice, of his goodness, of his truth. The declaration of these, we have them all in the various books of the Scriptures: there is never a book, but there is a testification of these attributes. In the book of Genesis we have a testimony of his *power* in making the world, of his *justice* in drowning the world, and of his *goodness* in saving Noah. In the book of Exodus, we have a testimony of his *providence* in leading the people of Israel through the Red Sea, in bringing them out of Egypt; we have a testimony of his *wisdom* in giving them his law. What should I name more? In the *New* Testament, in the Gospel, all is testimony. As the *Old* gave testimony to God, so the *New* to *Christ* : "*To him gave all the prophets witness* ;" not only the *Old* , but the *New* : "*These are they that testify of me*." Everywhere there is testimony of Christ,---of his *humility* , in taking our nature; of his *power* , in working miracles; of his *wisdom* , in the parables that he spoke; of his *patience* and *love* , in the torments that he suffered for us. Both Law and Gospel---the whole book of Scripture, and every part of it in these regards is fitly called "*the testimonies of the Lord*." And the holy Psalmist made choice of this name when he was to speak to the honour and glory of it; because it was that name from which he sucked a great deal of comfort, because it was the testimony of God's *truth* and *goodness* and *wisdom* and *power* to him; thereupon he makes so precious esteem of it as to account it his "*heritage*." *Richard Holdsworth* (1590-1649), *in* "*The Valley of Vision* "

**Verse 111 &mdash;** Thy testimonies." By "*testimonies* " is meant the covenant between God and his people; wherein he bindeth himself to them, and them to him. Some think that the excellency of the word is here set out by many names; but we must look to the propriety of every word: as before by "judgments," so by this word "*testimonies* ," is meant the covenant: not the commandments, because they cannot be an inheritance, for they cannot comfort us, because we cannot fulfil them, but fail in them, and cannot therefore take comfort in them. It is the gospel that bringeth peace and comfort. "*The law* ," when it is taken generally, containeth all the word, particularly the commandments; so "*the word* " generally containeth both law and gospel, but particularly the promises, as Rom 10. So likewise by the "*testimonies* ," when they are opposed to the law, is meant the promises of the covenant, as Isaiah 8, and this testimony is confirmed to us by the sacraments, as to them by sacrifices. *Richard Greenham*.

**Verse 111 &mdash;** "*As an heritage*." Why the divine testimonies should be called by the Psalmist an *inheritance* ; why he brings them within the compass of this notion, may not so easily be understood; for the word of God points out the inheritance, but it is not the inheritance itself. Yes, there is good reason to be given for the expression, were there no more than this, that we consider the inestimable comfort, and heavenly treasure that is to be found in the word of God; it is a rich mine of all celestial treasure, it is a storehouse of all good things, of all saving knowledge. All privileges whatsoever they are that we can expect on earth or heaven, they are all contained in the word of God: here is ground enough why it is called an *inheritance* ; he hath a good heritage that hath all these. Yet there is a better reason than this; for if it be so that heaven is our inheritance, then the word of God is; because it is the word that points out heaven, that gives the *assurance* of heaven: we have in the word of God all the evidences of heaven. Whatsoever *title* any saint hath to heaven, he hath it in and out of the word of God. There are the evidences in the word of God; both the evidence of *discovery* , it is the holy terrier of the celestial Canaan, and the evidence of *assurance* , it is as a sacred bond or indenture between God and his creature. St. Gregory said wittily, when he called it God's epistle that he sent to man for the declaration of his will and pleasure, he might as well have called it God's deed of gift, whereby he makes over and conveys to us all those hopes that we look for in heaven. Whatsoever interest we have in God, in Christ, whatsoever hope of bliss and glory, whatsoever comfort of the Spirit, whatsoever proportion of grace, all are made over to us in the promises of the gospel, in the word of God. Now put this together, look as in human affairs, *evidences* , though they be not properly the inheritance itself, yet they are called the inheritance, and are the inheritance, though not actually, yet virtually so; because all the title we have to an inheritance is in the deeds and evidences; therefore evidences are precious things. Though it be but a piece of paper, or parchment full of dust and worm eaten, yet it is as much worth sometimes as a county, as much worth as all a man's possessions besides. So likewise it is with the Scriptures; they are not actually and properly the inheritance itself, but they are *via* , the way to the kingdom. It is called the gospel of the kingdom, nay more, the kingdom itself: "*The kingdom of God is come among you* ," or "*to you* ". Why the kingdom? Why the inheritance? By the same reason, both, because here we have the *conveyance* , here we have the *deed* , here we have the *assurance* of whatsoever title or claim we make to heaven. *Richard Holdsworth*.

**Verse 111 &mdash;** "*They are the rejoicing of my heart*." He saith not that God's testimonies bring joy, but that they are joy; there is no other joy but the delight in the law of the Lord. For all other joy, the wise king said of laughter, "*thou art mad* ," and of joy, "*what is it that thou dost*?" Ecclesiastes 2. True joy is the earnest which we have of heaven, it is the treasure of the soul, and therefore should be laid up in a safe place; and nothing in this world is safe to place it in. And therefore with the spouse we say, "*We will be glad in thee, we will remember thy love more than wine*." Let others seek their joy in wine, in society, in conversation, in music; for me, thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their wine increased. These indeed are the precious fruits of the earth, but they seal not up special favour; a man may have together with them, an empty, husky, and chaffy soul. And therefore these are not the joys of the saints; they must have God, or else they die for sorrow; his law is their life. *Abraham Wright*.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 111 &mdash;** 1. Estate. 2. Entering upon it. 3. Entail upon it. 4. Enjoyment of it.

**Verse 111 &mdash;** Notice, 1. How rich the Psalmist was determined to be: "*Thy testimonies have I taken as a heritage*." Rich,--- a. In knowledge. b. In holiness. c. In comfort. d. In companionship, for God's company goes with his word. e. In hope. 2. How he clung to his wealth: "*For ever*." a. He hurt none by so doing; he could give generously his portion, and yet not waste. b. He was right; for he had the only wealth of which an everlasting possession is possible. c. He was wise. 3. How he rejoiced in his wealth: "*They are the rejoicing of my heart*." a. Here is internal and deep joy; not always possible to the possession of wealth. b. Pure, unalloyed joy; it is never so with other wealth. c. Safe joy; other joy is dangerous. d. Unloseable joy. *J. F.*

## Exposition Verse 112

> I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, *even unto* the end. 

"*I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even unto the end*." He was not half inclined to virtue, but heartily inclined to it. His whole heart was bent on practical, persevering godliness. He was resolved to keep the statutes of the Lord with all his heart, throughout all his time, without erring or ending. He made it his end to keep the law unto the end, and that without end. He had by prayer, and meditation, and resolution made his whole being lean towards God's commands; or as we should say in other words---the grace of God had inclined him to incline his heart in a sanctified direction. Many are inclined to preach, but the Psalmist was inclined to practise; many are inclined to perform ceremonies, but he was inclined to perform statutes; many are inclined to obey occasionally, but David would obey alway; and, alas, many are inclined for temporary religion, but this godly man was bound for eternity, he would perform the statutes of his Lord and King even unto the end. Lord, send us such a heavenly inclination of heart as this: then shall we show that thou hast quickened and taught us. To this end create in us a clean heart, and daily renew a right spirit within us, for only so shall we incline in the right direction.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 112 &mdash;** "*I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes alway* ," etc. In the former verse he showed his faith, and his joy which came thereof; now he showeth that here in this joy he will keep the commandments; whereby he showeth that this was a true joy, because it wrought a care to do good. For if we believe the promises truly, then we also love the commandments, otherwise faith is vain; a care to live a godly life nourisheth faith in God's promises. Here is the cause then why many regard not the word and sacraments; or if they do a little, it is to no purpose, because they labour not to keep the commandments. For unless they have care to do this, the word of God to them cannot be profitable, nor the sacraments sacred. *Richard Greenham*.

**Verse 112 &mdash;** "*I have inclined my heart to perform* ," etc. Observe. In Psa 119:36 he prayed to God, saying, "*Incline my heart unto thy testimonies*." And here he speaks about himself, saying, "*I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway even unto the end*." What need, then, was there to ask from God that which he in another place glories to have done himself? I answer: These things are not contrary the one to the other. God inclines, and the godly man inclines. Man inclines by striving; God inclines by effecting. Neither is that which the man attempts, nor that which he by striving achieves goodwards, from the man, but from God, who gives, "*both to will and to do of His good pleasure* :" Phl 2:13. *Wolfgang Musculus*.

**Verse 112 &mdash;** The sinful heart of itself will run any way; upon earthly things, upon evil things, or upon impertinent and unseasonable things; but it will not come to or keep upon that which it should mind; therefore it must be taken as by strong hand, and set upon spiritual things, set on musing and meditation of heavenly things. A carnal heart is like the loadstone, it cleaves to nothing but steel or iron, and both of them easily unite: but the heart must be of another property, and act in a higher way. And a good heart, though it thinks too much earthward, and runs often wrong, yet it will set itself in its thinking on right objects, and make itself and them to meet and unite. David tells us how he did; *he inclined his heart to God's commandments* , both to keep them and to meditate on them. He took and *bent his heart* , as a thing bending too much to other things; set his mind on musing on it. He found his heart and the law of God too far asunder, and so would continue, unless he brought them together and made them one. If he had not brought his heart to the word, he had never meditated: the object cannot apply itself to the mind, but the mind must bring itself to the object. No holy duties will come to us, we must come to them. *Nathanael Ranew* , *in* "*Solitude Improved by Divine Meditation* ," 1670.

**Verse 112 &mdash;** "*I have inclined mine heart to perform* ," etc. In this work he was determined to *continue*. 1. "*I have inclined my heart*." The counsel of the soul is like a balance; and the mind, which hath the commanding power over the affections, inclines the balance to that which it judges best. 2. It was to *perform* it that he thus *inclined* his heart. 3. And this not for a *time* , or some *particular occasion* , but *always* , and unto *the end*. Then *the end of life* would be the beginning *of glory*. *Adam Clarke*.

**Verse 112 &mdash;** "*I have inclined my heart*." The prophet, in order briefly to define what it is to serve God, asserts that he applied not only his hands, eyes, or feet, to the keeping of the law, but that he began with the affection of the heart. *John Calvin*.

**Verse 112 &mdash;** "*Unto the end*." Our life on earth is a race; in vain begins he to run swiftly, that fainteth, and gives over before he come to the end. And this was signified (saith Gregory) when in the law the tail of the beast was sacrificed with the rest: perseverance crowneth all. It is good we have begun to do well; let us also strive to persevere to the end. *William Cowper*.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 112 &mdash;** Heart leanings. Personality, pressure, inclination, performance, constancy, perpetuity.

**Verse 112 &mdash;** The godly man's obedience. 1. Its reality a. "*To perform;"* not words or feelings merely; but deeds. b. "*Thy statutes;"* not human inventions, nor self conceits, nor conventional maxims. 2. Its cordiality: "*inclined my heart*." a. Heart inclination is requisite for pleasing a heart searching God. b. And to make obedience easy and even delightful. c. "*I have* ," he says; was it therefore his doing? Yes. Was it his work alone? No. See Psa 119:36. d. The proofs. 1. Universality: "*statutes* ," the whole of them. 2. Uniformity: "*alway*." 3. Its constancy: "*even unto the end*." a. Though a man should be cautious when planning for the future, yet this life long purpose is right, wise, and safe. b. Nor can he purpose less, if holy fervency fill the heart. c. It is no more than what God and consistency demand. *J. F.*

