# Verses 137-144

## Exposition Verse 137

This passage deals with the perfect righteousness of Jehovah and his word, and
expresses the struggles of a holy soul in reference to that righteousness. The
initial letter with which every verse commences in the Hebrew is "P," and the
keyword to us is PURITY.

**Verse 137.** \---"_Righteous art thou_ , _O_ LORD" The Psalmist has not
often used the name of Jehovah in this vast composition. The whole psalm shows
him to have been a deeply religious man, thoroughly familiar with the things
of God; and such persons never use the holy name of God carelessly, nor do
they even use it at all frequently in comparison with the thoughtless and the
ungodly. Familiarity begets reverence in this case. Here he uses the sacred
name in worship. He praises God by ascribing to him perfect righteousness. God
is always right, and he is always actively right, that is, righteous. This
quality is bound up in our very idea of God. We cannot imagine an unrighteous
God. "_And upright are thy judgments_." Here he extols God's word, or recorded
judgments, as being right, even as their Author is righteous. That which comes
from the Righteous God is itself righteous. Jehovah both saith and doth that
which is right, and that alone. This is a great stay to the soul in time of
trouble. When we are most sorely afflicted, and cannot see the reason for the
dispensation, we may fall back upon this most sure and certain fact, that God
is righteous, and his dealings with us are righteous too. It should be our
glory to sing this brave confession when all things around us appear to
suggest the contrary. This is the richest adoration---this which rises from
the lips of faith when carnal reason mutters about undue severity, and the
like.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

S. Jerome, whom most of the medievalists follow, explains _Tsaddi_ as meaning
_justice_ or _righteousness_ , which, however, is עֶדִק _tsedek_ But he is so
far right that there is a play in this strophe on the sound of the initial
letter, as in the case of _Gemol_ ; for the very first word, righteous, is
עדִּיק _tsaddik_ , and the whole scope of the strophe is the strong grasp
which even the young and inexperienced soul can have of righteousness amidst
the troubles of the world.

\---_Neale and Littledale_.

All these verses begin with _Tzaddi_ , the eighteenth letter of the Hebrew
alphabet; Psa 119:137, 142, 144, with some form of the word which we render
righteous, or righteousness; each of the remainder with a wholly different
word.

\---_William S. Plumer_.

**Verse 137.** \---"_Righteous art thou_ , _O_ LORD," etc. Here David, sore
troubled with grief for the wickedness of his enemies, yea, tempted greatly to
impatience and distrust, by looking to their prosperous estate,
notwithstanding their so gross impiety, doth now show unto us a three fold
ground of comfort, which in this dangerous temptation upheld him. The first
is, a consideration of that which God is in himself; namely, just and
righteous: the second, a consideration of the equity of his word; the third, a
view of his constant truth, declared in his working and doing according to his
word. When we find ourselves tempted to distrust by looking to the prosperity
of the wicked, let us look up to God, and consider his nature, his word, his
works, and we shall find comfort.

"_Righteous art thou_." This is the first ground of comfort---a meditation of
the righteousness of God's nature; he alters not with times, he changes not
with persons, he is, alway and unto all, one and the same righteous and holy
God. Righteousness is essential to him, it is himself; and he can no more
defraud the godly of their promised comforts, not let the wicked go unpunished
in their sins, than he can deny himself to be God, which is impossible.

\---_William Cowper_.

**Verse 137.** \---"_Righteous art thou_ , _O_ LORD," etc. Essentially,
originally, and of himself; naturally, immutably and universally, in all his
ways and works of nature and grace; in his thoughts, purposes, counsels, and
decrees; in all the dispensations of his providence; in redemption, in the
justification of a sinner, in the pardon of sin, and in the gift of eternal
life through Christ. "_And upright are thy judgments_." They are according to
the rules of justice and equity. He refers to the precepts of the word, the
doctrines of the gospel, as well as the judgments of God inflicted on wicked
men, and all the providential dealings of God with his people, and also the
final judgment.

\---_John Gill_.

**Verse 137.** \---"_Righteous art thou_ , _O_ LORD," etc. Here is much to
keep the children of God in awe. The Lord is a righteous God: though they have
found mercy and taken sanctuary in his grace, the Lord is impartial in his
justice. God that did not spare the angels when they sinned, nor his Son when
he was a sinner by imputation, will not spare you, though you are the dearly
beloved of his soul: Pro 11:31. The sinful courses of God's children occasion
bitterness enough; they never venture upon sin, but with great loss. If Paul
give way to a little pride, God will humble him. If any give way to sin, their
pilgrimage will be made uncomfortable. Eli falls into negligence and
indulgence, then is the ark of God taken, his two sons are slain in battle,
his daughter-in-law dies, he himself breaks his neck. Oh! the wonderful
tragedies that sin works in the houses of the children of God! David, when he
intermeddled with forbidden fruit, was driven from his palace, his concubines
defiled, his own son slain; a great many calamities did light upon him.
Therefore the children of God have cause to fear; for the Lord is a just God,
and they will find it so. Here upon earth he hath reserved liberty to visit
their iniquity with rods, and their transgression with scourges. I must press
you to imitate God's righteousness: "If ye know that he is righteous, ye know
that every one that doeth righteousness is born of him:" 1Jo 2:29. You have a
righteous God; and this part of his character you should copy out.

\---_Thomas Manton_.

**Verse 137.** \---David's great care, when he was under the afflicting hand
of God, was to clear the Lord of injustice. Oh! Lord, saith he, there is not
the least show, spot, stain, blemish, or mixture of injustice, in all the
afflictions thou hast brought upon me. I desire to take shame to myself, and
to set to my seal, that the Lord is righteous, and that there is no injustice,
no cruelty, nor no extremity in all that the Lord hath brought upon me. He
sweetly and readily subscribes unto the righteousness of God in those sharp
and smart afflictions that God exercised him with. "_Righteous art thou_ , _O_
LORD, _and upright are thy judgments_." God's judgments are always just; he
never afflicts but in faithfulness. His will is the rule of justice; and
therefore a gracious soul dares not cavil nor question his proceedings.

\---_Thomas Brooks_.

**Verse 137.** \---The hundred and thirty-seventh verse, like the twenty-
fifth, is associated with the sorrows of an Imperial penitent (Gibbon, Decline
and Fall, ch. 46). When the deposed and captive Emperor Maurice was led out
for execution by the usurper Phocas, his five sons were previously murdered
one by one in his presence; and at each fatal blow he patiently exclaimed,
"_Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments_."

\---_Neale and Littledale_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verses 137-144.** \---

The righteousness of God and his word. (Psa 119:137-138).

Indignation at the forgetfulness of the enemies (Psa 119:139).

The purity of the word (Psa 119:140-141).

This righteousness of God and his testimonies is everlasting (Psa
119:142-144).

\---_Outlines Upon Keywords of the Psalm_ , _by Pastor C. A. Davis_.

**Verses 137-138.** \---Solemn contemplation.

  1. The contemplation of the deep and awful display of the divine character is good for the soul.

  2. It will lead to a conviction of the righteousness of God's character and administration.

  3. It will result in loyal submission.

\---_Outlines Upon Keywords of the Psalm_ , _by Pastor C. A. Davis_.

**Verse 137.** \---A consideration of divine righteousness. Convinces us of
sin, reconciles us to trying providence, excites a desire to imitate, arouses
to reverent adoration.

**Verse 137.** \---God is righteous.

  1. In his commands.

  2. In his threatenings.

  3. In his chastisement.

  4. In his judgments.

  5. In his promises.

\---_G. R._

## Exposition Verse 138

**Verse 138.** \---"_Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous
and very faithful_." All that which God hath testified in his word is right
and truthful. It is righteous, and may be relied upon for the present; it is
faithful, and may be trusted in for the future. About every portion of the
inspired testimonies there is a divine authority, they are issued and
published by God's command, and they bear the impress of the royal style which
carries omnipotence about it. Not only the precepts but the promises also are
commanded of the Lord, and so are all the teachings of Scripture. It is not
left to our choice whether we will accept them or no; they are issued by royal
command, and are not to be questioned. Their characteristic is that they are
like the Lord who has proclaimed them, they are the essence of justice and the
soul of truth. God's word is righteous and cannot be impeached; it is faithful
and cannot be questioned; it is true from the beginning, and it will be true
unto the end.

Dwell upon that sweet word---"very faithful." What a mercy that we have a God
to deal with who is scrupulously faithful, true to all the items and details
of his promises, punctual to time, steadfast during all time. Well may we risk
all upon a word which is "ever faithful, ever sure."

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 138.** \---"_Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous
and very faithful_." The force of this expression is much feebler than that of
the original, which literally may be rendered, "Thou hast commanded
righteousness thy testimonies, and truth exceedingly." So the Septuagint hath
it. Righteousness and truth were his testimonies; the testimonies were one
with his righteousness and truth. The English translation gives _the quality
of the testimonies_ ; the Hebrew gives _that which is commanded_ ; as if we
might say, Thou hast enjoined righteousness to be thy testimonies, and truth
exceedingly.

\---_John Stephen_.

**Verse 138.** \---"_Thy testimonies_." The word of God is called his
_testimony_ , both because it testifies his will, which he will have us to do;
as also because it testifies unto men truly what shall become of them, whether
good or evil. Men by nature are curious to know their end, rather than careful
to mend their life; and for this cause seek answers where they never get good:
but if they would know, let them go to the word and testimony; they need not
to seek any other oracle. If the word of God testify good things unto them,
they have cause to rejoice; if otherwise it witnesseth evil unto them, let
them haste to prevent it, or else it will assuredly overtake them.

\---_William Cowper_.

**Verse 138.** \---"_Righteous and very faithful_." Literally, "faithfulness
exceedingly." Harsh and severe as they may seem, they are all thoroughly for
man's highest good.

\---_William Kay_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 138.** \---"_Very faithful_." Based on a faithful covenant; confirmed
by faithful promises; carried out by a faithful Redeemer; enjoyed hitherto;
relied on for the future. "Though we believe not, yet he abideth faithful."

## Exposition Verse 139

**Verse 139.** \---In the last two verses David spoke concerning his God and
his law; here he speaks of himself, and says, "_My zeal hath consumed me,
because mine enemies have forgotten thy words_ :" this was no doubt occasioned
by his having so clear a sense of the admirable character of God's word. His
zeal was like a fire burning within his soul. The sight of man's forgetfulness
of God acted as a fierce blast to excite the fire to a more vehement flame,
and it blazed until it was ready to consume him. David could not bear that men
should forget God's words. He was ready to forget himself, aye, to, consume
himself, because these men forgot God. The ungodly were David's enemies: his
enemies, because they hated him for his godliness; his enemies, because he
abhorred them for their ungodliness. These men had gone so far in iniquity
that they not only violated and neglected the commands of God, but they
appeared actually to have forgotten them. This put David into a great heat; he
burned with indignation. How dare they trample on sacred things! How could
they utterly ignore the commands of God himself! He was astonished, and filled
with holy anger.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 139.** \---"My zeal hath consumed me." "_Zeal_ " is a high degree of
love; and when the object of that love is ill treated, it vents itself in a
mixture of grief and indignation, which are sufficient to wear and "consume"
the heart. This will be the case where men rightly conceive of that dishonour
which is continually done to God by creatures whom he hath made and redeemed.
But never could the verse be uttered, with such fulness of truth and
propriety, by any one, as by the Son of God, who had such a sense of his
Father's glory, and of man's sin, as no person else ever had. And,
accordingly, when his zeal had exerted itself in purging the temple, St. John
tells us, "his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal thine house
hath eaten me up." The place where it is so written Psa 69:9, and the passage
is exactly parallel to this before us.

\---_Horne_.

**Verse 139.** \---"My zeal hath consumed me," etc. Zeal is the heat or
tension of the affections; it is a holy warmth, whereby our love and anger are
drawn out to the utmost for God, and his glory. Now, our love to and his ways,
and our hatred of wickedness, should be increased, because of ungodly men.
Cloudy and dark colours in a table, make those that are and lively to appear
more beautiful; others' sin should make God and godliness more amiable in
thine eyes. Thy heart should take fire by striking on such cold flints. David
by a holy antiperistasis, did kindle from of coldness: "_My zeal hath consumed
me, because mine enemies have forgotten words_." Cold blasts make a fire to
flame the higher, and burn the hotter.

\---_George Swinnock_.

**Verse 139.** \---"My zeal hath consumed me." The fire of zeal, like the fire
which consumed Solomon's sacrifice, cometh down from heaven; and zealots are
not those salamanders that always live in the fire of hatred contention; but
seraphs, burning with the spiritual fire of divine love. And there true zeal
inflames the desires and affections of the soul. If it be true zeal, then
tract of time, multitude of discouragements, falseness of deserting the cause,
strength of oppositions, will not tire out a man's spirit. Zeal makes men
resolute, difficulties are but whetstones to their fortitude, it steels men's
spirits with an undaunted resolution. This was the zeal burned in the
disciples (Luke 24), that consumed David here, and dried up the very marrow of
Christ: John 2:17.

\---_Abraham Wright_.

**Verse 139.** \---"My zeal hath consumed me." There are divers kinds of zeal;
there is a zeal of the world, there is a zeal of the flesh, there is a zeal of
false religion, there is a zeal of heresy, and there is a zeal of the true
word of God. First, we see the zeal of the world maketh men to labour day
night to get a transitory thing. The zeal of the flesh torments men's minds
early and late for a momentary pleasure. The zeal of heresy maketh men travel
and compass sea and land, for the maintaining and increasing of their opinion.
Thus we see every man is eaten up with some kind of zeal. The drunkard is
consumed with drunkenness, the whoremonger is spent with his whoredom, the
heretic is eaten with heresies. Oh, how ought this to make us ashamed, who are
so little eaten, spent, and consumed with the zeal of word! And so much the
rather, because godly zeal leaveth in us advantage and a recompence, which the
worldly and carnally zealous men have not. For when they have spent all the
strength of their bodies, and powers of their mind, they have no gain or
comfort left, but torment of conscience; and when they are outwardly spent,
they are inwardly never the better: whereas the godly being concerned for a
good thing, and eaten up with the zeal of God's glory, have this notable
privilege and profit, that howsoever their outward man perisheth and decayeth,
yet their inward man is still refreshed and nourished to everlasting life. Oh,
what a benefit it is to be eaten up with the love and zeal of a good thing!

\---_Richard Greenham_.

**Verse 139.** \---"_Have forgotten thy words_." A proper phrase to set forth
in the bosom of the visible church who do not wholly deny and reject word and
rule of Scripture, but yet live on as though they had forgotten it: they do
not observe it; as if God had never spoken any such thing, or given them any
such rule. They that reject and condemn such things as the word enforceth,
surely do not remember to do them.

\---_Thomas Manton_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 139.** \---Zeal.

  1. Consuming self.

  2. Inflamed by that which would naturally quench it.

  3. Fed upon God's words.

**Verse 139.** \---Zeal.

  1. Flourishing in an unpromising atmosphere.

  2. Attaining an astonishing growth.

  3. Accomplishing a blessed work---the consumption of self.

\---_C. A. D._

**Verse 139.** \---

  1. The object of his zeal: "_Thy words_."

  2. The occasion of his zeal: "_Mine enemies_ ," etc.

  3. The fervour of his zeal: "_My zeal hath consumed me_."

\---_G. R._

## Exposition Verse 140

**Verse 140.** \---"_Thy word is very pure_." It is truth distilled, holiness
in its quintessence. In the word of God there is no admixture of error or sin.
It is pure in its sense, pure in its language, pure in its spirit, pure in its
influence, and all this to the very highest degree---"_very_ pure."
"_Therefore thy servant loveth it_ ," which is a proof that he himself was
pure in heart, for only those who are pure love God's word because of its
purity. His heart was knit to the word because of its glorious holiness and
truth. He admired it, delighted in it, sought to practise it, and longed to
come under its purifying power.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 140.** \---"_Thy word is very pure_." In the original, "tried,
purified, like gold in the furnace," absolutely perfect, without the dross
vanity and fallibility, which runs through human writings. The more we try the
promises, the surer we shall find them. Pure gold is so fixed, Boerhaave,
informs us of an ounce of it set in the eye of a glass furnace for two months,
without losing a single grain.

\---_George Horne_.

**Verse 140.** \---"_Thy word is very pure; therefore_ ," etc. The word of God
is not only "_pure_ ," free from all base admixture, but it is a _purifier_ ;
it cleanses from sin and guilt every heart with which into comes into contact.
"Now ye are clean," said Jesus Christ to his disciples, "by the word which I
have spoken unto you:" John 15:3. It is this its pure quality combined with
its tendency to purify every nature that yields to its holy influence, that
endears it to every child of God. Here it is that he finds those views of the
divine character, those promises, those precepts, those representations of the
deformity of sin, of the beauty of holiness, which lead him, above all things,
to seek conformity to the divine image. A child of God in his best moments
does not wish the word of God brought down to a level with his own imperfect
character, but desires rather that his character may be gradually raised to a
conformity to that blessed word. Because it is altogether pure, and because it
tends to convey to those who make it their constant study a measure of its own
purity, the child of God loves it, and delights to meditate in it day and
night.

\---_John Morison_.

**Verse 140.** \---"_Thy word is very pure_." Before I knew the word of God in
spirit and in truth, for its great antiquity, its interesting narratives, its
impartial biography, its pure morality, its sublime poetry, in a word, for its
beautiful and wonderful variety, I preferred it to all other books; but since
I have entered into its spirit, like the Psalmist, I love it above all things
for its purity; and desire, whatever else I read, it may tend to increase my
knowledge of the Bible, and strengthen my affection for its divine and holy
truths.

\---_Sir William Jones_ , 1746-1794.

**Verse 140.** \---"_Thy word_." Let us refresh our minds and our memories
with some of the Scripture adjuncts connected with "the word," and realize, in
some degree at least, the manifold relations which it bears both to God and
our souls. It is called "the word of Christ," because much of it was given by
him, and it all bears testimony to him...It is called "the word of his grace,"
because the glorious theme on which it loves to expatiate is _grace_ , and
especially grace as it is seen in Christ's dying love for sinful men. It is
called _ὁ λόγος τοῦ σταυροῦ_ "the word of the cross" (1Co 1:18), because in
the crucifixion of the divine Redeemer we see eternal mercy in its brightest
lustre. It is called "the word of the gospel," because it brings glad tidings
of great joy to all nations. It is called "the word of the kingdom," because
it holds out to all believers the hope of an everlasting kingdom of
righteousness and peace. It is called "the word of salvation," because the
purpose for which it was given is the salvation of sinners. It is called "the
word of truth," because, as Chillingworth says, it has God for its author,
salvation for its end, and truth without mixture of error for its contents.
And we will only add, it is called "the word of life," because it reveals to a
sinful, perishing world the doctrines of life and immortality.

\---_W. Graham_ , _in_ "_A Commentary on the First Epistle of John_ ," 1857.

**Verse 140.** \---"_Therefore thy servant loveth it_." Love in God is the
fountain of all his benefits extended to us; and love in man is the fountain
of all our service and obedience to God. He loved us first to do us good; and
hereof it comes that we have grace to love him next to do him service. Love is
such a duty that the want thereof cannot be excused in any; for the poorest
both may and should love God: yet without it all the rest thou canst do in his
service is nothing; nay, not if thou shouldest give thy goods to the poor, and
offer thy body to be burned. Small sacrifices, flowing from faith and love,
are welcome to him, where greater without these are but abomination to him.
Proofs of both we have in the widow's mite and Cain's rich oblation; whereof
the one was rejected, the other received. Happy are we though we cannot say,
"We have done as God commands," if out of a good heart we can say,---"We love
to do what he commands."

\---_William Cowper_.

**Verse 140.** \---"Therefore thy servant loveth it." Of all our grounds and
reasons of love to the word of God, the most noble and excellent is to love
the word for its purity. This showeth indeed that we are made partakers of the
Divine nature: 2Pe 1:4. For I pray you mark, when we hate evil as evil, and
love good as good, we have the same love and hatred that God hath. When once
we come to love things because they are pure, it is a sign that we have the
same love that God hath.

\---_Thomas Manton_.

**Verse 140.** \---"_Thy servant loveth it_." Otherwise, indeed, the Psalmist
would not have been the Lord's servant at all. But he glories in the title
because he delights in the pure service.

\---_John Stephen_.

**Verses 140-141.** \---God's own utterance is indeed without spot, and
therefore not to be carped at; it is pure, fire proved, noblest metal,
therefore he loves it, and does not, though young and lightly esteemed, care
for the remonstrances of his proud opponents, who are older and more learned
than himself.

\---_Franz Delitzsch_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 140.** \---

  1. An awakened sinner adoring the holy law.

  2. A saint loving it because the pure love the pure.

  3. A saint among sinners loving the law all the more for its contrast.

**Verse 140.** \---

  1. The crystal stream.

a. Flows from under the throne.

b. Mirrors heaven.

c. Undefiled through the ages.

d. Nourishes holiness as it flows.

  2. The enraptured pilgrim.

a. Keeping by its brink.

b. Delighted with its lucid depths.

  3. Pleased with its mirrored revelations---self, heaven, God.

  4. Cleansed and refreshed by its waters.

\---_W. B. H._

**Verse 140.** \---

  1. The purity of God's Word.

a. It proceeds from a perfectly pure source: "_Thy word_."

b. It reveals a purity otherwise unknown.

c. It treats impure subjects with absolute purity.

d. It inculcates the most perfect purity.

e. It produces such purity in those who are subject to its power.---

  2. The love which its purity inspires in gracious souls.

a. They love it because, while it reveals their natural impurity, it shows
them how to escape from it.

b. They love it because it conforms them to its own purity.

c. They love it because to a pure heart the purity of the word is one of its
chief commendations.---

  3. The evidences of this love to the pure word.

a. Desire to possess it in its purity.

b. Subjection to its spirit and teachings.

c. Zeal for its honour and diffusion.

\---_W. H. J. P._

## Exposition Verse 141

**Verse 141.** \---"_I am small and despised: yet do I not forget thy
precepts_." That fault of forgetfulness which he condemned in others (Psa
119:139) could not be charged upon himself. His enemies made no account of
him, regarded him as a man without power or ability, and therefore looked down
upon him. He appears to accept the situation and humbly take the lowest room,
but he carries God's word with him. How many a man has been driven to do some
ill action in order to reply to the contempt of his enemies: to make himself
conspicuous he has either spoken or acted in a manner which he could not
justify. The beauty of the Psalmist's piety was that it was calm and well
balanced, and as he was not carried away by flattery, so was he not overcome
by shame. If small, he the more jealously attended to the smaller duties; and
if despised, he was the more in earnest to keep the despised commandments of
God.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 141.** \---"_I am small and despised_ ," or, _I have been._ Some
versions render it _young_ ; as if it had respect to the time of his anointing
by Samuel, when he was overlooked and despised in his father's family (1Sa
16:11; 17:28); but the word here used is not expressive of age, but of state,
condition, and circumstances; and the meaning is, that he was little in his
own esteem, and in the esteem of men, and was despised; and that on account of
religion, in which he was a type of Christ (Psa 22:6; Isa 53:3), and which is
the common lot of good men, who are treated by the world as the filth of it,
and the offscouring of all things.

\---_John Gill_.

**Verse 141.** \---"_I am small_." They that love God may be reduced to a
mean, low, and afflicted condition; the Lord seeth it meet for divers reasons:

  1. That they may know their happiness is not in this world, and so the more long for heaven, and delight in heavenly things.

  2. It is necessary to cut off the provisions of the flesh and the fuel of their lusts. A rank soil breeds weeds; and when we sail with a full stream we are apt to be carried away with it.

  3. That they may be more sensible of his displeasure against their sins and scandalous carriage by which they have dishonoured him, and provoked the pure eyes of his glory.

  4. That they may learn to live upon the promises, and learn to exercise suffering graces; especially dependence upon God, who can support us without a temporal, visible interest.

  5. That God may convince the enemies that there is a people that do sincerely serve him, and not for carnal, selfish ends: Job 1.

  6. That his glory may be more seen in their deliverance; and therefore, before God doth appear for his children, he bringeth them very low.

\---_Thomas Manton_.

**Verse 141.** \---"_Small_." This applies to David in his early days of
trouble and persecution. It is difficult to find any other individual to whom
it is so suitable.

\---_James G. Murphy_.

**Verse 141.** \---A notable example to the shame of them, that perhaps will
serve and praise God in their prosperity, and when they are increased; but let
affliction or want come, and then they have little heart to do it.

\---_Abraham Wright_.

**Verse 141.** \---"_Yet do not I forget thy precepts_." God observeth what we
do in our trouble: "If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out
our hands to a strange god: shall not God search this out? for he knoweth the
secrets of the heart:" Psa 44:20-21. If we slacken our service to God, or fall
off to any degree of apostasy, the Judge of hearts knoweth all: God knoweth
whether we would have depraved and corrupt doctrine, worship, or ordinances;
or whether we will faithfully adhere to him, to his word, and worship, and
ordinances, whatever it cost us.

In our poor and despicable condition we see more cause to love the word than
we did before; because we experience supports and comforts which we have
thereby: "Knowing that tribulation worketh patience," etc. (Rom 5:3); "For as
the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by
Christ:" 2Co 1:5. God hath special consolations for his afflicted and despised
people, and makes their consolation by Christ to run parallel with, and keep
pace with, their sufferings for Christ.

\---_Thomas Manton_.

**Verse 141.** \---"_Yet do not I forget thy precepts_." We see by experience
that our affection leaves anything from the time it goes out of our
remembrance. We cease to love when we cease to remember; but earnest love ever
renews remembrance of that which is beloved. The first step of defection is to
forget what God hath commanded, and what we are obliged in duty to do to him;
and upon this easily follows the offending of God by our transgression. Such
beasts as did not chew their cud, under the law were accounted unclean, and
not meet to be sacrificed unto God: that was but a figure, signifying unto us
that a man who hath received good things from God, and doth not think upon
them, cannot feel the sweetness of them, and so cannot be thankful to God.

\---_William Cowper_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verses 141-144.** \---A mournful song arid a joyful refrain.

Stanza 1: "I am small and despised." Refrain. The everlasting righteousness of
God.

Stanza 2: "Trouble and anguish have seized me." Refrain: The everlasting
righteousness of God.

\---_C. A. D._

**Verse 141.** \---Here is---

  1. David pious, and yet poor. He was a man after God's own heart, and yet "_small and despised_ " in his own account and in account of many others.

  2. David poor and yet pious; "_small and despised_ " for his strict and serious godliness; yet his conscience can witness for him, that he "_did not forget God's precepts_."

\---_M. Henry_.

**Verse 141.** \---

  1. The source of man's littleness is in himself.

  2. The source of his greatness is in the Divine word. Hence the greatest philosopher is a small man compared with the most uneducated whose delight is in the law of God, and who meditates, etc.

\---_G. R._

**Verse 141.** \---

  1. A little scholar.

  2. A quick learner.

  3. A firm reminder.

**Verse 141.** \---Unknown, yet well known.

  1. The estimate formed of the believer by the world.

  2. The estimate formed of the believer by himself.

  3. The profession made by the believer to God.

  4. On a review, a revised estimate of the believer: 1Co 1:27; Jas 4:5.

\---_C. A. D._

## Exposition Verse 142

**Verse 142.** \---"_Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness_."
Having in a previous verse ascribed righteousness to God, he now goes on to
declare that that righteousness is unchanging and endures from age to age.
This is the joy and glory of the saints, that what God is he always will be,
and his mode of procedure towards the sons of men is immutable: having kept
his promise, and dealt out justice among his people, he will do so world
without end. Both the righteousnesses and the unrighteousnesses of men come to
an end, but the righteousness of God is without end. "_And thy law is the
truth_." As God is love, so his law is the truth, the very essence of truth,
truth applied to ethics, truth in action, truth upon the judgment seat. We
hear great disputes about, "What is truth?" The holy Scriptures are the only
answer to that question. Note, that they are not only true, but the truth
itself. We may not say of them that they contain the truth, but that they are
the truth: "thy law is the truth." There is nothing false about the law or
preceptory part of Scripture. Those who are obedient thereto shall find that
they are walking in a way consistent with fact, while those who act contrary
thereto are walking in a vain show.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 142.** \---"_Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness_." Here
the law of God is honoured by the additional encomium, that it is everlasting
righteousness and truth; as if it had been said, that all other rules of life,
with whatever attractions they may appear to be recommended, are but a shadow,
which quickly vanishes away. The Psalmist, no doubt, indirectly contrasts the
doctrine of the law with all the human precepts which were ever delivered,
that he may bring all the faithful in subjection to it, since it is the school
of perfect wisdom. There may be more of plausibility in the refined and subtle
disquisitions of men; but there is in them nothing firm or solid at bottom, as
there is in God's law. This firmness of the divine law he proves in the
following verse from one instance---the continual comfort he found in it when
grievously harassed with temptations. And the true test of the profit we have
reaped from it is, when we oppose to all the distresses of whatever kind which
may straiten us, the consolation derived from the word of God, that thereby
all sadness may be effaced from our minds. David here expresses something more
than he did in the preceding verse; for there he only said that he reverently
served God, although from his rough and hard treatment he might seem to lose
his labour; but now when distressed and tormented, he affirms that he finds in
the law of God the most soothing delight, which mitigates all griefs, and not
only tempers their bitterness, but also seasons them with a certain sweetness.
Assuredly when this taste does not exist to afford us delight, nothing is more
natural than for us to be swallowed up of sorrow.

\---_John Calvin_.

**Verse 142.** \---"_Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness_." Not
only righteous at the first giving out, but righteous in all ages and times;
and should we slight this rule that will hold for ever? In the world, new
lords, new laws; men vary and change their designs and purposes; privileges
granted today may be repealed tomorrow; but this word will hold true for ever.
Our justification by Christ is irrevocable; that part of righteousness is
everlasting. Be sure you are justified now upon terms of the gospel, and you
shall be justified for ever: your forgiveness is an everlasting forgiveness,
and your peace is an everlasting peace: "I will remember their sin no more:"
Jer 31:34. So the other righteousness of sanctification, it is for ever;
approve yourselves to God now, and you will approve yourselves at the day of
judgment.

\---_Thomas Manton_.

**Verse 142.** \---"_Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness_ ,"
etc. The original is better expressed thus, "Thy righteousness is
righteousness everlastingly, and thy law is truth." So the Septuagint. The
English translation expresses the perpetuity of the righteousness, the
original expresses also the character of it...God's righteousness is
essentially and eternally righteousness. The expressions are absolute; there
is only this righteousness, and only this truth.

\---_John Stephen_.

**Verse 142.** \---"_Thy law is the truth_."

  1. It is the _chief_ truth. There is some truth in the laws of men and the writings of men, even of heathens; but they are but sorry fragments and scraps of truth, that have escaped since the fall.

  2. It is the _only_ truth; that is, the only revelation of the mind of God that you can build upon. It is the rule of truth.

  3. It is the _pure_ truth. In it there is nothing but the truth, without the mixture of falsehood; every part is true as truth itself. It is true in the promises, threatenings, doctrines, histories, precepts, prohibitions.

  4. It is the _whole_ truth. It containeth all things necessary for the salvation of those that yield up themselves to be instructed by it.

\---_Thomas Manton_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 142.** \---Righteousness, immutability, and truth combined in the
revelation of God.

## Exposition Verse 143

**Verse 143.** \---"_Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me_." This
affliction may have arisen from his circumstances, or from the cruelty of his
enemies, or from his own internal conflicts, but certain it is that he was the
subject of much distress, a distress which apprehended him, and carried him
away a captive to its power. His griefs, like fierce dogs, had taken hold upon
him; he felt their teeth. He had double trouble: trouble without and anguish
within, as the apostle Paul put it, "without were rightings and within were
fears." "_Yet thy commandments are my delights_." Thus he became a riddle;
troubled, and yet delighted; in anguish, and yet in pleasure. The child of God
can understand this enigma, for well he knows that while he is cast down on
account of what he sees within himself he is all the more lifted up by what he
sees in the word. He is delighted with the commandments, although he is
troubled because he cannot perfectly obey them. He finds abundant light in the
commandments, and by the influence of that light he discovers and mourns over
his own darkness. Only the man who is acquainted with the struggles of the
spiritual life will understand the expression before us. Let the reader herein
find a balance in which to weigh himself. Does he find even when he is begirt
with sorrow that it is a delightful thing to do the will of the Lord? Does he
find more joy in being sanctified than sorrow in being chastised? Then the
spot of God's children is upon him.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 143.** \---"_Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy
commandments are my delights_." This is strange, that in the midst of anguish
David had _delight_ : but indeed the sweetness of God's word is best perceived
under the bitterness of the cross. The joy of Christ and the joy of the world
cannot consist together. A heart delighted with worldly joy cannot feel the
consolations of the Spirit; the one of these destroys the other: but in
sanctified trouble, the comforts of God's word are felt and perceived in a
most sensible manner. Many a time hath David protested this delight of his in
the word of God; and truly it is a great argument of godliness, when men come
not only to reverence it, but to love it, and delight in it. Let this be
considered by those unhappy men who hear it of custom, and count it but a
weariness.

\---_Abraham Wright_.

**Verse 143.** \---"_Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me_ ," or "_found
me_ ," etc. We need not take pains, as many do, "to find trouble and anguish;"
for they will, one day, "find us." In that day the revelations of God must be
to us instead of all worldly "delights" and pleasures, which will then have
forsaken us; and how forlorn and desolate will be our state if we should have
no other delights, no other pleasures, to succeed them, and to accompany us
into eternity. Let our study be then in the Scriptures, if we expect our
comfort in them in time to come.

\---_George Horne_.

**Verse 143.** \---"_Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me_." You may
conceive a bold figure here, as if Trouble and Anguish were being sent out
against the helpless sons of men. These, like enemies, were going round.
Instead of seizing upon the wicked, they had found the righteous man. So it
was by the ordering of God. I suppose many of us have remarked, that the
believer is never long at ease. He is in the world; he is in the flesh; there
is indwelling sin; there are enemies around; there is the great enemy; besides
all this, the Lord, for wise purposes, hides his face. Then the believer is in
trouble and anguish.

\---_John Stephen_.

**Verse 143.** \---"_Have taken hold on me_." Hebrew, _found me._ Like dogs
tracking out a wild beast hiding or fleeing.

\---_A. R. Fausset_.

**Verse 143.** \---"_Thy commandments are my delights_." Delight in moral
things (saith Aquinas) is the rule by which we may judge of men's goodness or
badness. _Delectatio est quies voluntatis in bono_. Men are good and bad as
the objects of their delight are: they are good who delight in good things,
and they are evil who delight in evil things.

\---_Thomas Manton_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 143.** \---Mingled emotions.

**Verse 143.** \---

  1. The dark cloud. Trouble, etc.

  2. His silver lining. Yet, etc.

**Verse 143.** \---

  1. The Saint cast into prison.

a. The jailers: "_Trouble and anguish_."

b. Their proceeding: "_take hold_ " and make him fast.

  2. Songs in the night.

a. Blessed theme: "_thy commandments_."

b. Ecstatic melodies: "_delights_."

  3. Let the prisoners hear them.

a. Pain held, sin held, despair held.

b. It is matter and melody to open prisons.

\---_W. B. H._

**Verse 143.** \---Consider,

  1. The excellency of the word, in that it gives delight when trouble and anguish oppress.

  2. The great kindness of God in so framing his word that it can give delight at such a time, and under such circumstances.

  3. The disposition of the believer to resort to the word for delight, when others give themselves over to vain grief and despondency.

  4. The blessed position of the believer, in that he need never be without joy.

\---_J. F._

## Exposition Verse 144

**Verse 144.** \---"_The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting_."
First he had said that God's testimonies were righteous, then that they were
everlasting, and now that their righteousness is everlasting. Thus he gives us
a larger and more detailed account of the word of God the longer he is engaged
in writing upon it. The more we say in praise of holy writ, the more we may
say and the more we can say. God's testimonies to man cannot be assailed, they
are righteous from beginning to end; and though ungodly men have opposed the
divine justice, especially in the plan of salvation, they have always failed
to establish any charge against the Most High. Long as the earth shall stand,
long as there shall be a single intelligent creature in the universe, it will
be confessed that God's plans of mercy are in all respects marvellous proofs
of his love of justice: even that he may be gracious. Jehovah will not be
unjust. "_Give me understanding, and I shall live_." This is a prayer which he
is constantly praying, that God will give him understanding. Here he evidently
considers that such a gift is essential to his living. To live without
understanding is not to live the life of a man, but to be dead while we live.
Only as we know and apprehend the things of God can we be said to enter into
life. The more the Lord teaches us to admire the eternal rightness of his
word, and the more he quickens us to the love of such rightness, the happier
and the better we shall be. As we love life, and seek many days that we may
see good, it behooves us to seek immortality in the everlasting word which
liveth and abideth for ever, and to seek good in that renewal of our entire
nature which begins with the enlightenment of the understanding and passes on
to the regeneration of the entire man. Here is our need of the Holy Spirit,
the Lord and giver of life, and the guide of all the quickened ones, who shall
lead us into all truth. O for the visitations of his grace at this good hour!

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 144.** \---"_The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting_."
Thy _moral law_ was not made for one people, or for one particular time; it is
as imperishable as thy nature, and of endless obligation. It is that law by
which all the children of Adam shall be judged. "_Give me understanding_." To
know and practise it. "_And I shall live_." Shall glorify thee, and live
eternally; not for the _merit_ of having done it, but because thou didst
fulfil the work of the law in my heart, having saved me from condemnation by
it.

\---_Adam Clarke_.

**Verse 144.** \---"_Give me understanding, and I shall live_." I read it in
connection with the preceding clause; for although David desires to have his
mind enlightened by God, yet he does not conceive of any other way by which he
was to obtain an enlightened understanding than by his profiting aright in the
study of the law. Further, he here teaches that men cannot, properly speaking,
be said to live when they are destitute of the light of heavenly wisdom; and
as the end for which men are created is not that, like swine or asses, they
may stuff their bellies, but that they may exercise themselves in the
knowledge and service of God, when they turn away from such employment their
life is worse than a thousand deaths. David therefore protests that for him to
live was not merely to be fed with meat and drink, and to enjoy earthly
comforts, but to aspire after a better life, which he could not do save under
the guidance of faith. This is a very necessary warning; for although it is
universally acknowledged that man is born with this distinction, that he
excels the lower animals in intelligence, yet the great bulk of mankind, as if
with deliberate purpose, stifle whatever light God pours into their
understandings. I indeed admit that all men desire to be sharp witted; but how
few aspire to heaven, and consider that the fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom. Since, then, meditation upon the celestial life is buried by earthly
care, men do nothing else than plunge into the grave, so that while living to
the world, they die to God. Under the term life, however, the prophet denotes
the utmost he could wish. Lord, as if he had said, although I am already dead,
yet if thou art pleased to illumine my mind with the knowledge of heavenly
truth, this grace alone will be sufficient to revive me.

\---_John Calvin_.

**Verse 144.** \---"_Give me understanding, and I shall live_." The saving
knowledge of God's testimonies is the only way to live. There is a threefold
life.

  1. Life natural.

  2. Life spiritual, and,

  3. Life eternal.

In all these considerations may the point be made good.

First. Life is taken for the life of nature, or the life of the body, or life
temporal, called "this life" in Scripture: 1Co 15:19; 1Ti 4:8. Life is better
preserved in a way of obedience than by evil doing; that provoketh God to cast
us off, and exposes us to dangers. It is not in the power of the world to make
us live or die a day sooner or longer than God pleaseth. If God will make us
happy, they cannot make us miserable: therefore, "_Give me understanding, and
I shall live;"_ that is, lead a comfortable and happy life for the present.
Prevent sin, and you prevent danger. Obedience is the best way to preserve
life temporal: as great a paradox as it seems to the world, it is a Scripture
truth, "Keep my commandments, and live" (Pro 4:4); and, "Take fast hold of
instruction; let her not go: keep her; for she is thy life" (Pro 4:13); and,
"Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour"
(Pro 3:16); and, "She is a tree of life" (Pro 3:18). The knowledge and
practice of the word is the only means to live comfortably and happily here,
as well as for ever hereafter.

Secondly. _Life spiritual_ ; that is twofold, the life of justification, and
the life of sanctification.

  1. The life of justification: "The free gift came upon all men unto justification of life:" Rom 5:18. He is dead, not only on whom the hangman hath done his work, but also he on whom the judge hath passed sentence, and the law pronounces him dead. In this sense we were all dead, and justification is called justification to life; there is no living in this sense without knowledge: "By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many:" Isa 53:11. We live by faith, and faith cometh by hearing, and hearing doeth no good unless the Lord giveth understanding; as meats nourish not unless received and digested.

  2. The life of sanctification: "And you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins:" Eph 2:1. And men live not properly till they live the life of grace; they live a false, counterfeit life, not a blessed, happy, certain, and true life. Now, this life is begun and carried on by saying knowledge: "The new man which is renewed in knowledge:" Col 3:10. Again, men are said to be "alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them:" Eph 4:18. They that are ignorant are dead in sin: life spiritual cometh by knowledge. Hence begins the change of the inward man, and thenceforth we live. "Give me understanding," _ut vere in te vivare_ , that the true life began in me may grow and increase daily, but never be quenched by sin.

Thirdly. _Life everlasting_ , or our blessed estate in heaven. So it is said
of the saints departed, they all live unto God: Luk 20:38. And this is called
the water of life, the tree of life, the crown of life; properly this is life.
What is the present life in comparison of everlasting life? The present life,
it is _mors vitalis_ , a living death; or _mortalis vita_ , a dying life, a
kind of death; it is always _in fluxu_ , like a stream: it runneth from us as
fast as it cometh to us: "He fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not:" Job
14:2. We die as fast as we live: it differeth but as the point from the line
where it terminateth. It is not one and the same, no permanent thing; it is
like the shadow of a star in a flowing stream. Its contentments are base and
low, called "the life of thine hand:" Isa 57:10. It is patched up of several
creatures, fain to ransack the storehouses of nature to support a ruinous
fabric. And compare it with the life of grace here, it doth not exempt us from
sin, nor miseries. Our capacities are narrow. We are full of fears, and
doubts, and dangers; but in the life of glory we shall neither sin nor sorrow
any more. This is meant here: "_The righteousness of thy testimonies is
everlasting: give me understanding, and I shall live;"_ it is chiefly meant of
the life of glory. This is the fruit of saving knowledge, when we so know God
and Christ as to come to God by him.

\---_Thomas Manton_.

**Verse 144.** \---"_I shall live_." I shall be kept from those sins which
deserve and bring death.

\---_Matthew Pool_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 144.** \---Everlasting righteousness revealed in the word, and
producing everlasting life in believers.

**Verse 144.** \---

  1. Eternal truths.

  2. Eternal life dependent upon them.

  3. A cry from amid these everlasting hills.

\---_W. B. H._

**Verse 144.** (_last clause_).---

  1. Consider the prayer in its simplicity.

a. It is suitable for the awakened sinner.

b. For the Christian struggling against temptation.

c. For the suffering believer.

d. For the worker

e. For aspiring minds in the church of God.

f. For expiring saints.

  2. The prayer more fully opened up.

a. Here is want confessed.

b. The prayer is evidently put upon the footing of free grace: "Give."

  3. Lay bare the argument in the prayer.

  4. The word of God, when practically and experimentally understood, is a pledge of life.

  5. The word of God is the incorruptible "seed" which liveth and abideth for ever.

  6. It is the food of life.

  7. It is the very flower and crown and glory of true life.

  8. It is righteous.

  9. It is everlasting.

\---See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 1572; "Alive."

