# Verses 121-128

## Exposition Verse 121

**Verse 121.** \---"_I have done judgment and justice_." This was a great
thing for an Eastern ruler to say at any time, for these despots mostly cared
more for gain than justice. Some of them altogether neglected their duty, and
would not even do judgment at all, preferring their pleasures to their duties;
and many more of them sold their judgments to the highest bidders by taking
bribes, or regarding the persons of men. Some rulers gave neither judgment nor
justice, others gave judgment without justice, but David gave judgment and
justice, and saw that his sentences were carried out. He could claim before
the Lord that he had dealt out even handed justice, and was doing so still. On
this fact he founded a plea with which he backed the prayer---"_Leave me not
to mine oppressors_." He who, as far as his power goes, has been doing right,
may hope to be delivered from his superiors when attempts are made by them to
do him wrong. If I will not oppress others, I may hopefully pray that others
may not oppress me. A course of upright conduct is one which gives us boldness
in appealing to the Great Judge for deliverance from the injustice of others.
Nor is this kind of pleading to be censured as self righteous: when we are
dealing with God as to our shortcomings, we use a very different tone from
that with which we face the censures of our fellow men; when they are in the
question, and we are guiltless towards them, we are justified in pleading our
innocence.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 121.** \---This commences a new division of the Psalm indicated by the
Hebrew letter _Ain_ \---a letter which cannot well be represented in the
English alphabet, as there is, in fact, no letter in our language exactly
corresponding with it. It would be best represented probably by what are
called "_breathings_ " in Greek.

\---_Albert Barnes_.

**Verse 121.** \---"_I have done judgment_ " against the wicked, "and
_justice_ " towards the good.

\---_Simon de Muis_ , 1587-1644.

**Verse 121.** \---"_I have done judgment and justice_." Here the view of
David in his judicial capacity might present itself to us; and if so, we have
David in the midst of large experience; for the words would take in a large
portion of his life. How blessed were their reflections, if, after a long
reign, all sovereign rulers could thus appeal unto God. It should be so; for
to him all shall be accountable at last. Even although we only conceive of
David as speaking in the character of a private man, the sentiment is worthy
of all consideration...or parents to say this of their dealings with their
children, masters of servants, a man of his neighbours, is very excellent.

\---_John Stephen_.

**Verse 121.** \---"_Judgment_ "and "_justice_ ," are often put in Scripture
for the same, and when put together, the latter is as an epithet to the
former. "_I have done judgment and justice_ ," that is, I have done judgment
justly, exactly, to a hair.

\---_Joseph Caryl_.

**Verse 121.** \---

> Do right and be a king,  
>  Be this thy brazen bulwark of defence,  
>  Still to preserve thy conscious innocence,  
>  Nor ever turn pale with guilt.
>
> \---_Francis's Horace_.

**Verse 121.** \---"_If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
before God_ :" 1Jo 3:21. This "testimony of conscience" has often been "the
rejoicing" of the Lord's people, when suffering under unmerited reproach or
"proud oppression." They have been enabled to plead it without offence in the
presence of their holy, heart searching God; nay, even when, in the near
prospect of the great and final account, they might well have been supposed to
shrink from the strict and unerring scrutiny of their Omniscient Judge.
Perhaps, however, we are not sufficiently aware of the importance of moral
integrity in connexion with our spiritual comfort. Mark the boldness which it
gave David in prayer: "_I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine
oppressors_."

\---_Charles Bridges_.

**Verse 121.** \---"_Leave me not to mine oppressors_." That is, maintain me
against those who would wrong me, because I do right; interpose thyself
between me and my enemies, as if thou wert my pledge. Impartial justice upon
oppressors sometimes lays judges open to oppression; but yet they who run
greatest hazards in zeal for God shall find God ready to be their surety, when
they pray, "_be surety for thy servant_ ," as in the next verse.

\---_Abraham Wright_.

**Verses 121-122.** \---"_I have done judgment and justice_ ;" but, that I may
always do it, and never fail in doing it, "_uphold thy servant unto good_ ,"
by directing him, so that he may always relish what is good, and then the
consequence will be that "_the proud will not calumniate me_ ;" for he that is
well established "_unto good_ ," and so made up that nothing but what is good
and righteous will be agreeable to him, he will so persevere that he will have
no reason for fearing "_the proud that calumniate him_."

\---_Robert Bellarmine_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verses 121-128.** \---The just man's prayer against injustice. Out of the
prison of oppression he:

Appeals to God to be his surety (Psa 119:121-122);

Utters his weary longing for deliverance (Psa 119:123-125);

Points to the "time" (Psa 119:126); and

Professes his supreme love for God's law in contrast to the oppressors'
contempt of it (Psa 119:127-128).

\---_Outlines Upon Keywords of the Psalm_ , _by Pastor C. A. Davis_.

**Verses 121-122.** \---The double appeal.

  1. Of conscious integrity: "_I have done judgment_ ," etc.

  2. Of conscious deficiency: "_Be surety for thy servant for good_."

\---_Outlines Upon Keywords of the Psalm_ , _by Pastor C. A. Davis_.

## Exposition Verse 122

**Verse 122.** \---"_Be surety for thy servant for good_." Answer for me. Do
not leave thy poor servant to die by the hand of his enemy and thine. Take up
my interests and weave them with thine own, and stand for me. As my Master,
undertake thy servants' cause, and represent me before the faces of haughty
men till they see what an august ally I have in the Lord my God.

"_Let not the proud oppress me_." Thine interposition will answer the purpose
of my rescue: when the proud see that thou art my advocate they will hide
their heads. We should have been crushed beneath our proud adversary the devil
if our Lord Jesus had not stood between us and the accuser, and become a
surety for us. It is by his suretyship that we escape like a bird from the
snare of the fowler. What a blessing to be able to leave our matters in our
Surety's hands, knowing that all will be well, since he has an answer for
every accuser, a rebuke for every reviler.

Good men dread oppression, for it makes even a wise man mad, and they send up
their cries to heaven for deliverance; nor shall they cry in vain, for the
Lord will undertake the cause of his servants, and fight their battles against
the proud. The word "servant" is wisely used as a plea for favour for himself,
and the word "proud" as an argument against his enemies. It seems to be
inevitable that proud men should become oppressors, and that they should take
most delight in oppressing really gracious men.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 122.** \---"_Be surety for thy servant for good_." What David prays to
God to be for him, that Christ is for all his people: Heb 7:22. He drew nigh
to God, struck hands with him, gave his word and bond to pay the debts of his
people; put himself in their law place and stead, and became responsible to
law and justice for them; engaged to make satisfaction for their sins, to
bring in everlasting righteousness for their justification, and to preserve
and keep them, and bring them safe to eternal glory and happiness; and this
was being a surety for them for good.

\---_John Gill_.

**Verse 122.** \---"_Be surety for thy servant for good_." There are three
expositions of this clause, as noting the end, the cause, the event.

  1. Undertake for me, _ut sire bonus et justus_ , so Rabbi Arama on the place; surety for me _that I may be good_. Theodoret expounds it, "Undertake that I shall make good my resolution of keeping thy law." He that joins, undertakes; though we have precepts and without God's undertaking we shall never be able to perform our duty.

  2. Undertake for me to help me _in doing good_ ; so some read it: would not take his part in an evil cause. To commend a wrong to God's protection, is to provoke him to hasten our punishment, to us serve under our oppressors; but, when we have a good cause, and good conscience, he will own us. We cannot expect he should maintain us and bear us out in the Devil's service, wherein we have entangled selves by our own sin.

  3. _Be with me for good_ : so it is often rendered: "_Shew me a token for good_ " (Psa 86:17); "_Pray not for this people for good_ " (Jer 11:14); so, "_Remember me, O my God, for good_ " (Neh 13:31). So here "_Be surety for thy servant for good_."

\---_Thomas Manton_.

**Verse 122.** \---"_Be surety for thy servant for good_." It is the prayer
Hezekiah in his trouble, "_O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me_ " (Isa
38:14); it is the prayer of Job for a "daysman" to between him and God (Job
9:33); it is the cry of the church before Incarnation for the appearance of a
Divine Mediator; it is the confidence of every faithful soul since that
blessed time in the perpetual of our Great High Priest in heaven, which is to
us the pledge of blessedness.

\---_Agellius and Cocceius_ , _in_ _Neale and Littledale_.

**Verse 122.** \---"_Be surety for thy servant for good_." His meaning is,
thou knowest how unjustly I am calumniated and evil spoken of in parts: where
I am not present or where I may not answer for myself, answer thou for me.

\---_William Cowper_.

**Verse 122.** \---"_Be surety for thy servant for good_." The keen eye of
world may possibly not be able to affix any blot upon my outward confession;
but, "if thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities; O Lord, who shall stand?" The
debt is continually accumulating, and the prospect of payment as distant as
ever. I might well expect to be "left to my oppressors," I should pay all that
was due unto my Lord. But behold! "_Where is the fury of the oppressor_?" Isa
51:13. The surety is found---the debt is paid---the ransom is accepted---the
sinner is free. There was a voice heard heaven---"_Deliver him from going down
to the pit: I have found a ransom_ ," Job 33:24. The Son of God himself became
_Surety for a stranger_ , and "_smarted for it_ ," Pro 11:15. At an infinite
cost---the cost of his precious blood---he delivered me from "_mine
oppressors_ "---sin---Satan world---death---hell.

\---_Charles Bridges_.

**Verse 122.** \---Some observe that this is the only verse throughout the
whole psalm wherein the Word is not mentioned under the name of "law,
"judgments," "statutes," or the like terms, and they make this note
it,---"Where the Law faileth, there Christ is a surety of a better testament."
There are _those_ that render the words thus,---"_Dulcify, or, delight thy
servant good_ ," that is, make him joyful and comfortable in the pursuit and
of that which is good.

\---_John Trapp_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 122.** \---

  1. Suretyship entreated.

  2. Good expected.

  3. Obligation acknowledged: "_thy servant_."

**Verse 122.** (_first clause_).---After explaining the Psalmist's meaning as
shown in the preceding verse, this sentence may be used for a sermon upon the
Suretyship of Christ, by a reference to Heb 7:22.

  1. A Surety for good wanted---the deeply felt, though, perhaps, undefined want of a sin burdened soul.

a. The mere statement of a gratuitous pardon on the part of God is not
thoroughly believable to such a soul, nor, if it could be believed in, would
it give peace to the conscience. For, on the one hand, the pardon could not be
perceived as just, nor as consistent with God's necessary hatred of sin, yet
the conscience demands this perception; on the other hand, mere pardon does
not show how the obligation to a perfect fulfilment of God's law, as
righteousness, can be met, yet the conscience demands to see this before it
can be satisfied to realize peace; Luther's experience.

b. Now the Scriptures tell us that God "justifies the ungodly " and that his
"righteousness" is declared in his justifying sinners: Rom 3:25. He can
forgive sins with justice. He can treat sinners as righteous persons, and yet
be righteous in doing so. How? By a Surety. Therefore, a Surety is the real
want.

  2. A Surety existent. Jesus is the Surety.

a. He undertook to bear our obligation to the law's penalty, and fulfilled it
in death. Thus pardon, though mercy to us, is an act of justice to Christ.

b. He undertook our obligation to a perfect obedience, and satisfied for that
in his fulfilment of the law; thus for God to treat us as righteous is only
just to Christ.

c. God has shown his satisfaction with the office of Christ, and with his
work, by the resurrection and glorification of Christ. Hence a well accredited
and efficient Surety exists.

  3. A Surety nigh at hand.

a. In the gospel, Christ as Surety comes to the sinner as truly as though he
himself left his throne and came in his own person.

b. Thus, he is so close that a sinner has but to receive the gospel into his
heart and he receives Christ.

c. Christ received as a Surety is the Surety for whosoever receives him.

\---_J. F._

## Exposition Verse 123

**Verse 123.** \---"_Mine eyes fail for thy salvation_." He wept, waited, and
watched for God's saving hand, and these exercises tried the eyes of his faith
till they were almost ready to give out. He looked to God alone, he looked
eagerly, he looked long, he looked till his eyes ached. The mercy is, that if
our eyes fail, God does not fail, nor do _his_ eyes fail. Eyes are tender
things, and so are our faith, hope and expectancy: the Lord will not try them
above what they are able to bear. "_And for the word of thy righteousness_ :"
a word that would silence the unrighteous words of his oppressors. His eyes as
well as his ears waited for the Lord's word: he looked to see the divine word
come forth as a fiat for his deliverance. He was "waiting for the verdict"---
the verdict of righteousness itself. How happy are we if we have righteousness
on our side; for then that which is the sinners' terror is our hope, that
which the proud dread is our expectation and desire. David left his reputation
entirely in the Lord's hand, and was eager to be cleared by the word of the
Judge rather than by any defence of his own. He knew that he had done right,
and, therefore, instead of avoiding the supreme court, he begged for the
sentence which he knew would work out his deliverance. He even watched with
eager eyes for the judgment and the deliverance, the word of righteousness
from God which meant salvation to himself.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 123.** \---"_Mine eyes fail for thy salvation_." In times of great
sorrow when the heart is oppressed with care, and when danger threatens on
every side, the human eye expresses with amazing accuracy the distressed and
anguished emotions of the soul. The posture here described is that of an
individual who perceives himself surrounded with enemies of the most
formidable character, who feels his own weakness and insufficiency to enter
into conflict with them, but who is eagerly looking for the arrival of a
devoted and powerful friend who has promised to succour him in the hour of his
calamity. As his friend delays the hour of his coming, his fears and anxieties
multiply, till he finds himself in the condition of one whose eyes fail and
grow dim in looking for the approach of his great deliverer. In this condition
was the suppliant here described,---his enemies were ready to swallow him up,
and except from heaven he had no hope of final extrication. To the promises of
God he betook himself, and while waiting their accomplishment, and looking
with the utmost eagerness to the word of God's righteousness, he gives
utterance to the desponding sentiment, "_Mine eyes fail for thy salvation_." O
for such warm and anxious desires for that great salvation, which will realize
the victory over all our spiritual enemies, and enable us to shout
triumphantly through all eternity in the name of our almighty Deliverer!

\---_John Morison_.

**Verse 123.** \---"_Mine eyes fail...for the word of thy righteousness_."
Albeit the words of promise be neither performed, nor like to be performed,
yet faith should justify the promise, for true and faithful.

\---_David Dickson_.

**Verse 123.** \---"_For the word of thy righteousness_." This would be the
word of promised salvation, which the Lord had given in righteousness. What an
amazing plea---God on the ground of his own righteousness appealed to for
deliverance---and yet how true! Or this might be the word of his justice, the
issuing of justice, the exercising of a righteous decision between him and his
oppressors. He had looked for the Lord to interpose between them, and so to
fulfil all he had promised on behalf of the believer. The Lord will vindicate
his own. Are any in great difficulty; and are they waiting for the Lord to
interpose, to whom they have committed their concerns? ...Wait on; he will not
disappoint a gracious hope.

\---_John Stephen_.

**Verse 123.** \---"_For the word of thy righteousness_ ," or, "the word of
thy _justice_ ;" that is to say, for the sentence of justice on my oppressors,
as the first part of the verse teaches; for the passing this sentence will be
equivalent to the granting the salvation which the psalmist so earnestly
desired.

\---_George Phillips_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 123.** \---Holy expectation---long maintained, in danger of failing;
this fact pleaded; reasons for never renouncing it.

## Exposition Verse 124

**Verse 124.** \---"_Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy_." Here he
recollects himself: although before men he was so clear that he could
challenge the word of righteousness, yet before the Lord, as his servant, he
felt that he must appeal to mercy. We feel safest here. Our heart has more
rest in the cry, "_God be merciful to me_ ," than in appealing to justice. It
is well to be able to say, "_I have done judgment and justice_ ," and then to
add in all lowliness, yet "_deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy_."
The title of servant covers a plea; a master should clear the character of his
servant if he be falsely accused, and rescue him from those who would oppress
him; and, moreover, the master should show mercy to a servant, even if he deal
severely with a stranger. The Lord condescendingly deals, or has
communications with his servants, not spurning them, but communing with them;
and this he does in a tender and merciful way, for in any other form of
dealing we should be crushed into the dust. "_And teach me thy statutes_."
This will be one way of dealing with us in mercy. We may expect a master to
teach his own servant the meaning of his own orders. Yet since our ignorance
arises from our own sinful stupidity, it is great mercy on God's part that he
condescends to instruct us in his commands. For our ruler to become our
teacher is an act of great grace, for which we cannot be too grateful. Among
our mercies this is one of the choicest.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 124.** \---"_Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy_." If I am
a "_servant_ " of God, I can bring my services before him only upon the ground
of "_mercy;"_ feeling that for my best performances I need an immeasurable
world of mercy---pardoning---saving---everlasting mercy; and yet I am
emboldened by the blood of Jesus to plead for my soul---"_Deal with thy
servant according unto thy mercy_."

But then I am ignorant as well as guilty; and yet I dare not pray for divine
teaching, much and hourly as I need it, until I have afresh obtained mercy.
"_Mercy_ " is the first blessing, not only in point of importance, but in
point of order. I must seek the Lord, and know him as a Saviour, before I can
go to him with any confidence to be my teacher. But when once I have found
acceptance to my petition---"_Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy_
"---my way will be opened to follow on my petition---"_Teach me thy statutes.
Give me understanding, that if may know thy testimonies_ "---that I may know,
walk, yea, "run in the way of thy commandments" with an enlarged heart, Psa
119:32. My plea is the same as I have before urged with acceptance (Psa
119:94)---"_I am thy servant_."

\---_Charles Bridges_.

**Verse 124.** \---"_Thy mercy_." All the year round, every hour of every day,
God is richly blessing us; both when we sleep and when we wake, his mercy
waits upon us. The sun may leave off shining, but our God will never cease to
cheer his children with his love. Like a river, his loving-kindness is always
flowing with a fulness inexhaustible as his own nature, which is its source.
Like the atmosphere which always surrounds the earth, and is always ready to
support the life of man, the benevolence of God surrounds all his creatures;
in it, as in their element, they live, and move, and have their being. Yet as
the sun on summer days appears to gladden us with beams more warm and bright
than at other times, and as rivers are at certain seasons swollen with the
rain, and as the atmosphere itself on occasions is fraught with more fresh,
more bracing, or more balmy influences than heretofore, so is it with the
mercy of God; it hath its golden hours, its days of overflow, when the Lord
magnifies his grace and lifteth high his love before the sons of men.

\---_C. H. S._

**Verse 124.** \---"_Teach me_." David had Nathan and Gad the prophets; and
beside them, the ordinary Levites to teach him. He read the word of God
diligently, and did meditate in the law night and day; but he acknowledgeth
all this was nothing unless God did teach him. Other teachers speak to the
ear, but God speaks to the heart: so Paul preached to Lydia, but God opened
her heart. Let us pray for this grace.

\---_William Cowper_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verses 124-125.** \---The servant of God.

  1. Making profession: "_I am thy servant_."

  2. Making confession---of guilt, dulness, ignorance.

  3. Making petition---for mercy, understanding, and teaching.

\---_C. A. D._

**Verse 124.** \---Heavenly instruction a great mercy.

**Verse 124.** \---

  1. His confidence in divine mercy.

  2. His submission to divine authority.

  3. His prayer for divine teaching.

\---_G. R._

**Verse 124.** \---A Perfect Prayer.

  1. As to the matter of it.

a. Here is nothing superfluous; no petition for wealth, nor for honours, nor
for anything the worldling covets.

b. Here is nothing wanting; "_Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy_ "
comprehends everything the guilty soul needs; "_Teach me thy statutes_ "
comprehends all a saint needs to be anxious for.

  2. As to the manner of it.

a. It is direct and definite.

b. It is simple and fervent.

c. It is reverent yet bold.

  3. As to the spirit of it.

a. "_Deal with thy servant;"_ a sense of obligation; a feeling of devotedness;
a spirit of consecration to holy work.

b. "_Deal...according to thy mercy;"_ a sense of unworthiness; becoming
humility; submissiveness to the divine will as to what form the mercy shall
take; great faith in the mercy, its freeness and sufficiency.

c. "_Teach me thy statutes_." Longing for holiness, sense of ignorance, of
weakness, of dependence upon special divine spiritual influence.

\---_J. F._

## Exposition Verse 125

**Verse 125.** \---"_I am thy servant_." This is the third time he has
repeated this title in this one section: he is evidently fond of the name, and
conceives it to be very effective plea. We who rejoice that we are sons of God
are by no the less delighted to be his servants. Did not the firstborn Son
assume the servant's form and fulfil the servant's labour to the full? What
high, honour can the younger brethren desire than to be made like the Heir of
things.

"_Give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies_." In the previous
verse he sought teaching; but here he goes much further, and craves
understanding. Usually, if the instructor supplies the teaching, the pupil
finds the understanding; but in our case we are far more dependent, must beg
for understanding as well as teaching: this the ordinary teacher cannot give,
and we are thrice happy that our Divine Tutor can furnish us with it. We are
to confess ourselves fools, and then our Lord will make us wise, as well as
give us knowledge. The best understanding is that which enables us to render
perfect obedience and to exhibit intelligent faith, and it is this which David
desires,---"_understanding, that I may know thy testimonies_." Some would
rather not know these things; they prefer to be at ease in the dark rather
than possess the light which leads to repentance and diligence. The servant of
God longs to know in an understanding manner all that the Lord reveals of man
and to man; he wishes to be so instructed that he may apprehend and comprehend
that which is taught him. A servant should not be ignorant concerning his
master, or his master's business; he should study the mind, will, purpose, and
aim of him whom he serves, for so only can he complete his service; and as no
man knows these things so well as his master himself, he should often go to
him for instructions, lest his very zeal should only serve to make him the
greater blunderer.

It is remarkable that the Psalmist does not pray for understanding through
acquiring knowledge, but begs of the Lord first that he may have the gracious
gift of understanding, and then may obtain the desired instruction. All that
we know before we have understanding is apt to spoil us and breed vanity in
us; but if there be first an understanding heart, then the stores of knowledge
enrich the soul, and bring neither sin nor sorrow therewith. Moreover, this
gift of understanding acts also in the form of discernment and thus the good
man is preserved from hoarding up that which is false and dangerous: he knows
what are and what are not the testimonies of the Lord.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 125.** \---"_I am thy servant; give me understanding_ ," etc. I am not
a stranger to thee, but thine own domestic servant; let me want no grace,
which may enable me to serve thee.

\---_William Cowper_.

**Verse 125.** \---"_I am thy servant_." That thou art the servant of God,
thou shouldest regard as thy chiefest glory and blessedness.

\---_Martin Geier_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 125.** \---

  1. An office accepted.

  2. Fitness requested.

  3. Discernment desired.

**Verse 125.** \---

  1. A cheerful acknowledgment: "_I am thy servant_."

  2. A desire implied---to serve more perfectly.

  3. A need recognized---Divine instruction in holy service.

  4. A plea urged: "_I am thy servant_ ," therefore "_Teach me_ ," etc.

\---_W. H. J. P._

## Exposition Verse 126

**Verse 126.** \---"_It is time for thee, Lord, to work: For they have made
void thy law_." David was a servant, and therefore it was always his time to
work: but being oppressed by a sight of man's ungodly behaviour, he feels that
his Master's hand is wanted, and therefore he appeals to him to work against
the working of evil. Men make void the law of God by denying it to be his law,
by promulgating commands and doctrines in opposition to it, by setting up
tradition in its place, or by utterly disregarding and scorning the authority
of the lawgiver. Then sin becomes fashionable, and a holy walk is regarded as
a contemptible puritanism; vice is styled pleasure, and vanity bears the bell.
Then the saints sigh for the presence and power of their God: Oh for an hour
of the King upon the throne and the rod of iron! Oh for another Pentecost with
all its wonders, to reveal the energy of God to gain sayers, and make them see
that there is a God in Israel! Man's extremity, whether of need or sin, is
God's opportunity. When the earth was without form and void, the Spirit came
and moved upon the face of the waters; should he not come when society is
returning to a like chaos? When Israel in Egypt were reduced to the lowest
point, and it seemed that the covenant would be void, then Moses appeared and
wrought mighty miracles; so, too, when the church of God is trampled down, and
her message is derided, we may expect to see the hand of the Lord stretched
out for the revival of religion, the defence of the truth, and the glorifying
of the divine name. The Lord can work either by judgments which hurl down the
ramparts of the foe; or by revivals which build up the walls of his own
Jerusalem. How heartily may we pray the Lord to raise up new evangelists, to
quicken those we all early have, to set his whole church on fire, and to bring
the world to his feet. God's work is ever honourable and glorious; as for our
work, it is as nothing apart from him.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 126.** \---"_It is time for thee, Lord, to work_." Was ever vessel
more hopelessly becalmed in mid ocean? or did crew ever cry with more frenzy
for some favouring breeze than those should cry who man the Church of the
living God? If God work not, it is certain there is nothing before the Church
but the prospect of utter discomfiture and overthrow. Greater is the world
than the Church if God be not in her. But if God be in her, she shall not be
moved. May he help her, and that right early!

When he arises to work we know not what may be the form and fashion of his
operations. He worketh according to the counsel of his own will; and who knows
but that when once he awakes, and puts on his strength, it may not be confined
in its results to the immediate and exclusive quickening of the spiritual life
of the Church; but may be associated with providential upheavals and
convulsions which will fill the heart of the world with astonishment and
dismay. His spiritual kingdom does not stand in isolation. It has relations
which closely involve it with the material universe, and with human society
and national life. There have been times when God has worked, and the signs of
his presence have been seen, in terrible shaking of the nations, in the
ploughing up from their foundations of hoary injustice, in the smiting of
grinding tyrannies, and in the emancipation of peoples whose life had been a
long and hopeless moan. There have been times, too, and many, when he has
worked through the elements of nature---through blasting and mildew, through
floods and famine, through locust, caterpillar and palmer worm; through
flagging commerce, with its machinery rusting in the mill and its ships
rotting in the harbour. All these things are his servants. Sometimes the sleep
of the world, and the Church too, is so profound that it can be broken only by
agencies like the wind, or fire, or earthquake, which made the prophet shiver
at the mouth of the cave, and without which the voice that followed, so still,
so small and tender, would have lost much of its melting and subduing power.
When society has become drugged with the Circean cup of worldliness, and the
voices that come from eternity are unheeded, if not unheard, even terror has
its merciful mission. The frivolous and superficial hearts of men have to be
made serious, their idols have to be broken, their nests have to be stoned, or
tossed from the trees where they had been made with so much care, and they
have to be taught that if this life be all, it is but a phantom and a mockery.
When the day of the Lord shall come, in which he shall begin to work, let us
not marvel if it "_shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon
every one that is lifted up; and he shall be brought low; and upon all the
cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon every high tower, and
upon every fenced wall, and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all
pleasant pictures. And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the
haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the Lord alone shall be exalted in
that day_." But this working of God will also take other shapes. Will it not
be seen in the inspiration of the Church with faith in its own creed, so far
as that creed has the warrant of the Divine word? Does the Church believe its
creed? It writes it, sets it forth, sings it, defends it; but does it believe
it, at least with a faith which begets either enthusiasm in itself, or respect
from the world? Have not the truths which form the methodized symbols of the
Church become propositions instead of living powers? Do they not lie embalmed
with superstitious reverence in the ark of tradition, tenderly cherished for
what they have been and done? But is it not forgotten that if they be truths
they are not dead and cannot die? They are true now, or they were never true;
living now, or they never lived. Time cannot touch them, nor human opinion,
nor the Church's sluggishness or unbelief, for they are emanations from the
Divine essence, instinct with his own undecaying life. They are not machinery
which may become antiquated and obsolete and displaced by better inventions;
they are not methods of policy framed for conditions which are transient, and
vanishing with them; they are not scaffolding within which other and higher
truth is to be reared from age to age. They are like him who is the end of our
conversation, "_Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, today, and for ever_." There
is not one of them which, if the faith it awakens were but commensurate with
its intrinsic worth, would not clothe the Church with a new and wondrous
power. But what would be that power if that faith were to grasp them all? It
would be life from the dead.

\---_Enoch Mellor_ (1823-1881), _in_ "_The Hem of Christ's Garment, and other
Sermons_ "

**Verse 126.** \---"_It is time for thee_ , Lord, _to work_." עֵת expresses
emphatically the proper time for the Lord to do his own work; as if the
Psalmist had said, "It is not for us to prescribe the time and occasion for
God to exercise his power, and to vindicate the authority of his own law; he
does everything at the proper time, and he will at the proper season punish
those who have made void his law, and who have become notorious for their
impiety and wickedness."

\---_George Phillips_.

**Verse 126.** \---"_It is time to work_ ," just as when the attack of some
illness is becoming more severe, you hurry to the physician, that he may come
more quickly, lest he should later be unable to do any good. So when the
prophet saw in the Holy Spirit the rebellion of the people, their luxury,
pleasures, deceits, frauds, avarice, drunkenness, he runs, for our help, to
Christ, whom he knew to be alone able to remedy such sins; implores him to
come, and admits of no delay.

\---_Ambrose_ , _in_ _Neale and Littledale_.

**Verse 126.** \---"_It is time for thee, Lord, to work_."---Infidelity was
never more subtle, more hurtful, more plausible, perhaps more successful, than
in the day in which we live. It has left the low grounds of vulgarity and
coarseness and ribaldry, and entrenched itself upon the lofty heights of
criticism, philology, and even science itself. It pervades to a fearful extent
our popular literature; it has invested itself with the charms of poetry, to
throw its spell over the public mind; it has endeavoured to enweave itself
with science; and he must be little acquainted with the state of opinion in
this land, who does not know that it is espoused by a large portion of the
cultivated mind of this generation. "_It is time for thee, Lord, to work_."

\---_John Angell James_ , 1785-1859.

**Verse 126.** \---"_It is time for thee_ , Lord, _to work_ ," etc. To send
the Messiah, to work righteousness, to fulfil the law and vindicate the honour
of it, broken by men. It was always a notion of the Jews that the time of the
Messiah's coming would be when it was a time of great wickedness in the earth;
and which seems to agree with the word of God, and was true in fact. See Mal
2:17; 3:1-3, 15-16; 4:2.

\---_John Gill_.

**Verse 126.** \---"_It is time for thee, Lord, to work_ ," etc. True it is,
Lord, that we are not to appoint thee thy times and limits, for thou art the
Ancient of Days, Time's Creator and destination. Neither do we presume to
press in at the portal of thy privy chamber, to "know the times and seasons"
which thou our Father hast reserved in thine own power; yet, Lord, thou hast
taught us, as to discern the face of the sky, so to descry the signs of the
times, and from the cause to expect the effect which necessarily doth ensue.
"Thou art a God full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great
kindness" (Psa 103:8); and thou dost sustain many wrongs of the sons of men,
being crushed with their sins as a cart is laden with sheaves: but if still
they continue to load thee, thou wilt case thyself of that burden, and cast it
on the ground of confusion. Thou art "slow to anger, but great in power, and
wilt not surely clear the wicked" (Nah 1:3). Thou dost for a long space hold
thy peace at men's sins, and art still, and dost restrain thyself. But if men
will not turn, thou wilt whet thy sword and bend thy bow, and make it ready.
Patient thou art, and for a long time dost forbear thine hand; but when the
forehead of sin begins to lose the blush of shame, when the beadroll of
transgressions doth grow in score from East to West, when the cry of them
pierceth above the clouds, when the height of wickedness is come unto the top,
and the fruits thereof are ripe and full, then it is time for thee, Lord, to
take notice of it, to awake like a giant, and to put to thine all revenging
hand.

But our sins are already ripe, yea, rotten ripe, the measure of our iniquities
is full up to the brim. Doubtless out land is sunken deep in iniquity; our
tongues and works have been against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his
glory; the trial of our countenance doth testify against us (Isa 3:8-9), yea,
we declare our sins as Sodom; we hide them not, the cry of our sins is
exceeding grievouS, the clamours of them pierce the skies, and with a loud
voice roar, saying: "How long, Lord, holy and true? How long ere thou come to
avenge thyself on such a nation as this?" Rev 6:10; Jer 9:9.

\---_George Webbe_ , _in_ "_A Posie of Spiritual Flowers_ ," 1610.

**Verse 126.** \---"_It is time for thee, Lord_." Some read it, and the
original will bear it, "_It is time to work for thee, O Lord_ ;" it is time
for every one in his place to appear on the Lord's side, against the
threatening growth of profaneness and immorality. We must do what we can for
the support of the sinking interests of religion, and, after all, we must beg
of God to take the work into his own hands.

\---_Matthew Henry_.

**Verse 126.** \---"_They have made void thy law_." In the second verse of
this section he complained that the proud would oppress him, now he complains
that they destroyed the law of God. Who, then, are David's enemies, who seek
to oppress him? Only such as are enemies to God, and seek to destroy his law.
A great comfort have we in this, that if we love the Lord, and study in a good
conscience to serve him we can have no enemies but such as are enemies to God.

\---_William Cowper_.

**Verse 126.** \---"_They have made void thy law_." As if they would not only
sin against the Law, but sin away the Law, not only withdraw themselves from
the obedience of it, but drive St out of the world; they would make void and
repeal the holy acts of God, that their own wicked acts might not be
questioned; and lest the Law should have a power to punish them, they will
deny it a power to rule them; that's the force of the simple word here used,
as applied to highest transgressing against the Law of God.

\---_Joseph Caryl_.

**Verses 126-127.** \---Everything betters a saint. Not only ordinances, word,
sacraments, holy society, but even sinners and their very sinning. Even these
draw forth their graces into exercise, and put them upon godly, broken hearted
mourning. A saint sails with every wind. As the wicked are hurt by the best
things, so the godly are bettered by the worst. Because "_they have made void
thy law, therefore do I love thy commandments_." Holiness is the more owned by
the godly, the more the world despiseth it. The most eminent saints were those
of Caesar's (Nero's) house (Phl 4:22); they who kept God's name were they who
lived where Satan's throne was (Rev 2:13). Zeal for God grows the hotter by
opposition; and thereby the godly most labour to give the glory of God
reparation.

\---_William Jenkyn_ (1612-1685), _in_ "_The Morning Exercises_."

### Hints to the Village Preacher

**Verses 126-128.** \---

  1. A terrible fact: "_They have made void thy law_ :" Psa 119:126.

  2. Two blessed inferences: "_Therefore_ ," "_Therefore_ ," etc., Psa 119:127-128.

**Verse 126.** \---"_They make void the law_ ,"

By denying inspiration,

By exalting tradition,

By antinomianism,

By scepticism,

By indifference, etc.

**Verse 126.** \---

  1. There are times when sin is specially active and dominant.

  2. Such times reveal the dependence of the church upon God.

  3. Such times awaken the desires of the church for the intervention of God.

  4. Such times are the times when God does arise to plead his own cause.

\---_W. H. J. P._

**Verse 126.** \---

  1. The work anticipated---the vindication of the divine law.

  2. The work delayed.

  3. The work executed: "_It is time_ ," etc.

\---_G. R._

## Exposition Verse 127

**Verse 127.** \---"_Therefore I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above
fine gold_." As it was God's time to work so it was David's time to love. So
far from being swayed by the example of evil men, so as to join them in
slighting the Scriptures, he was the rather led into a more vehement love of
them. As he saw the commandments slighted by the ungodly, his heart was in
sympathy with God, and he felt a burning affection for his holy precepts. It
is the mark of a true believer that he does not depend upon others for his
religion, but drinks water out of his own well, which springs up even when the
cisterns of earth are all dried. Our holy poet amid a general depreciation of
the law felt his own esteem of it rising so high that gold and silver sank in
comparison. Wealth brings with it so many conveniences that men naturally
esteem it, and gold as the symbol of it is much set by; and yet, in the
judgment of the wise, God's laws are more enriching, and bring with them more
comfort than all the choicest treasures. The Psalmist could not boast that he
always kept the commands; but he could declare that he loved them; he was
perfect in heart, and would fain have been perfect in life. He judged God's
holy commands to be better than the best earthly thing, yea, better than the
best sort of the best earthly thing; and this esteem was confirmed and forced
into expression by those very oppositions of the world which drive hypocrites
to forsake the Lord and his ways.

> The dearer, for their rage,  
>  Thy words I love and own,---  
>  A wealthier heritage  
>  Than gold and precious stone.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 127.** \---"_Therefore I love thy commandments above gold_ ," etc.
Partly, because it is one evidence of their excellency, that they are disliked
by the vilest of men. Partly, out of a just indignation and opposition against
my sworn enemies; and partly, because the great and general apostasy of others
makes this duty more necessary to prevent their own and other men's relapses.

\---_Matthew Pool_.

**Verse 127.** \---"_I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above fine
gold_." The image employed brings before us the picture of the miser; his
heart and his treasure are in his gold. With what delight he counts it! with
what watchfulness he keeps it! hiding it in safe custody, lest he should be
despoiled of that which is dearer to him than life. Such should Christians be,
spiritual misers, counting their treasure which is "_above fine gold;"_ and
"_hiding it in their hearts_ ," in safe keeping, where the great despoiler
shall not be able to reach it. Oh, Christians! how much more is your portion
to you than the miser's treasure! Hide it; watch it; retain it. You need not
be afraid of covetousness in spiritual things: rather "covet earnestly" to
increase your store; and by living upon it and living in it, it will grow
richer in extent, and more precious in value.

\---_Charles Bridges_.

**Verse 127.** \---"_I love thy commandments_." He professes not that he
fulfilled them, but that he loved them; and truly it is a great progress in
godliness, if we be come thus far, as from our heart, to love them. The
natural man hates the commandments of God; they are so contrary to his
corruption; but the regenerate man, as he hates his own corruption, so he
loves the word, because according to it he desires to be reformed. And here is
our comfort, that, albeit we cannot do what is commanded, yet if we love to do
it, it is an argument of grace received. "_Above gold_ " etc. It is lawful to
love those creatures which God hath appointed for our use; with these
conditions: the one is, that the first seat in our affection of love be
reserved to God; and any other thing we love, that we love it in him and for
him, and give it only the second room. Thus David, being a natural man, loved
his natural food; but he protests he loved the law of the Lord more than his
appointed food; and here he loves the commandments of God above all gold.

\---_William Cowper_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 127.** \---The world's assault upon the truth a reason for our loving
it.

**Verse 127.** \---

  1. The object of love: "_Thy commandments_."

  2. The degree of love: "_above gold_ ," etc.

  3. The reason of this love: "_therefore_ ," etc., because its object must ultimately prevail.

\---_G. R._

**Verse 127.** \---God's will versus the golden idol.

  1. God's commandments are better than gold.

  2. The love of them is proportionably nobler.

  3. The unmeasurable superiority of character they produce.

\---_W. B. H._

## Exposition Verse 128

**Verse 128.** \---"_Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things
to be right_." Because the ungodly found fault with the precepts of God,
therefore David was all the more sure of their being right. The censure of the
wicked is a certificate of merit; that which they sanction we may justly
suspect, but that which they abominate we may ardently, admire. The good man's
delight in God's law is unreserved, he believes in all God's precepts
concerning all things.

"_And I hate every false way_." Love to truth begat hatred of falsehood. This
godly man was not indifferent to anything, but that which he did not love he
hated. He was no chip in the porridge without flavour; he was a good lover or
a good hater, but he was never a waverer. He knew what he felt, and expressed
it. He was no Gallio, caring for none of the things. His detestation was as
unreserved as his affection; he had not a good word for any practice which
would not bear the light of truth. The fact that such large multitudes follow
the broad road had no influence upon this holy mail, except to make him more
determined to avoid every form of error and sin. May the Holy Spirit so rule
in our hearts that our affections may be in the same decided condition towards
the precepts of the word.

### Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

**Verse 128.** \---"_I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be
right_." It is no compromising testimony to the integrity and value of the
Lord's precepts with which the Psalmist concludes, "_I esteem all thy precepts
concerning all things to be right_ "---every command, however hard; every
injunction, however distasteful; every precept, however severe; even cut off
thy right hand, pluck out thy right eye; forget thine own people and thy
father's house; take up thy cross daily; sell all that thou hast---yea, Lord,
even so, "_all_ thy precepts concerning ALL things are right." What a blessed
truth to arrive at, and find comfort in!

\---_Barton Bouchier_.

**Verse 128.** \---"_I esteem all thy precepts_ ," etc. We must not only
respect all God's commandments, but also respect them all alike, and give them
all the like respect. Obedience must be universal.

\---_R. Mayhew_ , _in_ "_The Death of Death in the Death of Christ_ ," 1679.

**Verse 128.** \---"_All_." The many _alls_ in this verse used (not unlike
that in Eze 44:30) showeth the integrity and universality of his obedience.
"_All_ " is but a little word, but of large extent.

\---_John Trapp_.

**Verse 128.** \---"_All thy precepts concerning all things to be right_." He
had a high estimate of God's precepts; he thought them just in all things;
just, because they prescribe nothing but that which is exactly just; and just,
because they bring a just punishment on the transgressors, and a reward to the
righteous.

\---_William Nicholson_.

**Verse 128.** \---The upright man squares all his actions by a right rule:
carnal reason cannot bias him, corrupt practice cannot sway him, but God's
sacred word directs him. Hence it is that his respect is universal to all
divine precepts, avoiding all evil, performing all good without exception.
Thus David's upright man here _esteems God's precepts concerning all things to
be right_ , and therefore is careful to observe them. Hence it is, that he is
the same man at all times, in all places; because at all times, and in all
societies, he acts by one and the same rule. It is a good saying of S.
Cyprian, "_ea non est religio, sed dissimulatio, quce per omnia non constat
sibi_ ," that is not piety, but hypocrisy, that is not in all things like
itself, since the upright man measures every action by the straight line of
divine prescript.

\---_Abraham Wright_.

**Verse 128.** \---"_I hate every false way_." The best trial of our love to
God and his word is the contrary---hatred of sin and impiety: "Ye that love
the Lord, hate evil." He that loves a tree, hates the worm that consumes it;
he that loves a garment, hates the moth that eats it; he that loveth life,
abhorreth death; and he that loves the Lord hates every thing that offends
him. Let men take heed to this, who are in love of their sins: how can the
love of God be in them?

Religion binds us not only to hate one way of falsehood, but all the ways of
it. As there is nothing good, but in some measure a godly man loves it; so is
there nothing evil, but in some measure he hates it. And this is the
perfection of the children of God; a perfection not of degrees; for we neither
love good, nor hate evil as we should; but a perfection of parts; because we
love every good, and we hate every evil in some measure.

\---_William Cowper_.

**Verse 128.** \---"_And I hate_." The Being who loves the good with infinite
intensity must hate evil with the same intensity. So far from any
incompatibility between this love and this hatred, they are the counterparts
of each other,---opposite poles of the same moral emotion.

\---_John W. Haley_ , _in_ "_A Examination of the alleged Discrepancies of the
Bible_ ," 1875.

**Verse 128.** \---"_I hate every false way_." If Satan get a grip of thee by
any one sin, is it not enough to carry thee to damnation? As the butcher
carries the beast to the slaughter, sometime bound by all the four feet, and
sometime by one only; so it is with Satan. Though thou be not a slave to all
sin; if thou be a slave to one, the grip he hath of thee, by that one sinful
affection, is sufficient to captive thee.

\---_William Cowper_.

### Hints to Preachers

**Verse 128.** (_first clause_).---This view should be taken of all divine
precepts in their bearing,

  1. Toward Christ.

  2. Toward Self.

  3. Toward the World.

  4. Toward the Church.

  5. Toward Heaven.

\---_W. J._

**Verse 128.** \---The Bible right.

  1. Its science is correct.

  2. Its history is true.

  3. Its promises are genuine.

  4. Its morality is perfect.

  5. Its doctrines are divine.

\---_W. J._

**Verse 128.** \---Learn four lessons

  1. It is a good thing when wicked men do not praise the truth they cannot love.

  2. It is a suspicious circumstance when they are found speaking well of any part of it; it is a Judas' kiss in order to betray its interests.

  3. It must be right to accept and love what the wicked oppose.

  4. It is always safe to be on the opposite side to them.

\---_J. F._

